---
title: Innovation Specialist
permalink: /join/position-description/gs-14/
layout: default-intro
lead: GSA Excepted Service position description
position_title: GS-14
app_close_date:
sub_parent_title:
sub_parent_permalink:
breadcrumb: true
published: true
listed: false
---

This is the official position description for the GS-14 level. [Learn more about GS levels](https://18f.gsa.gov/join/#government-pay-grades).

You may also apply for this position at the GS-15 level. [Read the GS-15 position description here.]({{site.baseurl}}/join/position-description/gs-15/)

## GS-14 Innovation Specialist

### Basic Information

#### Job announcement number:

1700257JCDE

#### Number of vacancies:

3 (Additional vacancies may be filled from this announcement as needed)

#### Location:

Washington, DC; San Francisco, CA; Chicago, IL; New York, New York; Virtual (100% remote)

#### Work Schedule:

Full time - Excepted Service: Not to exceed 24 months (2 years); may be extended for an additional 2 years for a maximum of 4 years total.

#### Travel requirement:

Occasional travel may be required up to 10% per year

#### Supervisory status:

No

#### Security clearance:

Public trust. Background investigation required.

#### Salary Range:

Base salary GS-14 - $88,136 to $114,578. Total compensation will include locality pay based on the individual's duty location. For locality pay details, please visit <https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/salaries-wages/>.

#### Series & Grade:

0301-14

#### Opening and closing period for this job application:

Monday, April 24 - Friday, April 28, 2017, 11:59pm Eastern

#### Who may apply:

All United States citizens and nationals (residents of American Samoa and Swains Islands)

### Summary

This is a Schedule A position under 5 CFR 213.3102(r) to hire unique technical skills to develop innovative digital tools and services in the Excepted Services, US Digital Service 18F Fellowship Program. The 18F office is charged with developing innovative digital tools and services and uses lean startup and agile development principles to collaborate with other agencies to fix technical problems, build products, and improve how government serves the public through technology.

As an Innovation Specialist, the team member serves the government and makes an impact on a massive scale. The position requires that fellows perform work of an exceptional degree of difficulty across a wide range of topics at the convergence of technology, policy, and delivery. The incumbent leverages their experience deploying high quality, user centric platforms and services to lead major initiatives, consult on systems and policy proposal, and provide technical, policy, and programmatic guidance to government. The position involves access to personally identifiable information (PII) data.

### Key Requirements:

​1. You must be a U.S. Citizen or National.
2. Suitable for Federal employment, determined by a background investigation.
3. You may be required to serve a trial period.
4. Direct Deposit of salary check to financial organization required.
5. Males born after 12/31/1959 must have registered with the Selective Service​.

### Duties

Typical duties for the fellow include, but are not limited to:

-   Conceiving/recommending projects/studies to advance the state of the art in the specialty area; applying forward thinking design and development principles to product or services development, delivery and program management, such as lean startup, user centered design, and agile development;
-   Analyzing and scoping the technical and policy requirements needed to implement complex digital solutions;
-   Assessing the state of digital services provided by the Federal Government, and working to align strategies and practice; conferring with key government/private officials and top experts in the field, representing the agency at technical symposia and/or conferences;
-   Developing authoritative papers/reports; developing and leading adoption of government­-wide standards for digital services, leading to their adoption across citizen and business­ facing government services;
-   Demonstrating thought leadership and contributing best practices in a variety of technologies and principles; and

### Qualifications

Qualifications are based on length and level of experience. Therefore, in addition to describing duties performed, applicants must provide the exact dates of each period of employment (from month/year to month/year) and the number of hours per week if part time. Qualification determinations cannot be made when resumes do not include the required information, so failure to provide this information may result in disqualification.

#### Applicants applying for this job must meet the following requirements:

Have product management related experience demonstrating *each* of the five competencies *and* specialized experience listed below:

-   **Software Engineering Technical Experience:** Ability to use software engineering technologies to deliver technical solutions and products.
-   **Software Engineering Practices:** Ability to apply tools, technologies, and established engineering best practices to help deliver innovative technical solutions and products.
-   **Communication:** Ability to communicate effectively with a variety of audiences to establish a shared vision and understanding of a project’s technical implementation, objectives and goals.
-   **Technical Leadership:** The ability to provide technical leadership, mastery, and architecture on engineering projects.
-   **18F Core Values Alignment**: The ability to work with integrity, transparency and resiliency in civic minded or high impact environment.

To qualify at a GS-14 level you must demonstrate at least one year of specialized experience at the next lower grade level GS-13 in the federal services or equivalent:

-   Use of innovative software engineering technologies such as dynamic programming languages, relational and/or non-relational database programming, web development, containerization, cloud technologies, infrastructure automation, configuration management, and/or unix-based operating systems.
-   Experience with software engineering best practices such as open source, source control, automated testing, continuous integration and deployment, and peer review.
-   Working on cross-functional, multidisciplinary teams that deliver digital products and services in an incremental, user-focused environment.
-   Developing and communicating technical architecture and vision, and responsibility for planning and implementation of that vision.

### Evaluation

Your application will be reviewed to determine whether you (a) are eligible to apply for and meet the qualification requirements for the position; (b) have provided all of the required documentation for consideration; and (c) whether you are among the candidates referred to the selecting official for consideration.

You must meet all Qualification requirements.

You will be evaluated on your overall possession of the following competencies/knowledge, skills, and abilities.
-   Knowledge of and expertise in user centered design, consumer internet technologies, service delivery, and management approaches, allowing the candidate to provide sound and authoritative leadership on all issues related to the program.
-   Knowledge and expertise in product delivery, agile development methodologies, and open source software development.
-   Knowledge of and expertise in driving and implementing technology solutions that overcome significant challenges resulting from complex or bureaucratic environments, or technically difficult problems; Skill in oral communication to present sensitive recommendations to higher authority
-   Comprehensive knowledge of and expertise in all stages of product or business development, and ability to lead complex, technology and policy initiatives from inception to implementation.
-   Skill in design, development and deployment of solutions leveraging current and emergent technologies and best practices.

### Reasonable Accommodation Policy

Federal agencies must provide reasonable accommodation to applicants with disabilities where appropriate. Applicants requiring reasonable accommodation for any part of the application and hiring process should contact the hiring agency directly. Determinations on requests for reasonable accommodation will be made on a case-by-case basis.

To learn more, please consult the following resources:

-   [Disability Employment - Reasonable Accommodations (OPM)](https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/disability-employment/reasonable-accommodations/)
-   [How to contact an agency](https://www.usajobs.gov/Help/how-to/application/agency/contact/)

### Benefits

GSA has been repeatedly named as one of the 'Best Place\[s\] to Work' in the federal government.

GSA offers its employees a wide range of benefits, including:

-   federal health insurance plans (choose from a wide range of plans);
-   life insurance coverage with several options to choose from;
-   leave policies to help you take care of your personal, recreational and health care needs;
-   Thrift Savings Plan (similar to a 401(k) plan);
-   flexible work schedules and telework;
-   transit and child care subsidies; and
-   training and development

### Veteran’s Preference

Veterans who served on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces and were separated under honorable conditions may be eligible for veterans’ preference. When claiming preference, veterans must provide a copy of their [DD-214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty](https://www.usajobs.gov/Help/faq/application/documents#dd-214), or other acceptable documentation.

Applicants claiming 10 point preference will need to submit Form SF-15, Application for 10-point Veterans’ Preference. If you have questions about the applicability of veterans’ preference for a particular vacancy please [contact the agency posting the announcement](https://www.usajobs.gov/Help/how-to/application/agency/contact/).

Veterans’ preference does not apply to positions in the Senior Executive Service or to internal agency actions such as a reassignment or promotion.

To learn more, please consult the following resources:

-   [Feds Hire Vets](http://www.fedshirevets.gov/)

-   [Veterans’ Preference Advisor](http://webapps.dol.gov/elaws/vets/vetpref/choice.htm)

-   [Frequently Asked Questions - Veterans (OPM)](https://www.opm.gov/FAQS/topic/veterans/index.aspx)

-   [Veterans Employment Initiative (OPM)](https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/veterans-employment-initiative/vet-guide/)

### Instructions for Submitting Resumes:

All resumes must be submitted through the GSA Innovation Specialist Job Application (link below in next section). Please fill out all applicable fields.

### GSA Innovation Specialist Application:

18f.gsa.gov/join/backend-software-engineer/

If applicable, please only submit all Veteran’s documentation to Jacqueline Coleman &lt;<jacqueline.coleman@gsa.gov>&gt;. Please subject the email “Veteran’s documentation for Job Announcement 1700257JCDE”

### Contact

If you have any questions about this job opportunity, please email Esther Chang at <join18F@gsa.gov>

### Equal Employment Opportunity Policy

The United States Government does not discriminate in employment on the basis of race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity), national origin, political affiliation, sexual orientation, marital status, disability, genetic information, age, membership in an employee organization, retaliation, parental status, military service, or other non-merit factor.

## To learn more, please consult the following resources:

-   [Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) office at OPM](https://www.opm.gov/about-us/our-people-organization/support-functions/equal-employment-opportunity/)
-   [Office of Equal Opportunity](http://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/internal_eeo/index.cfm)


### Ready to apply?

<section class="usa-grid-full" id="gs-14-apply">
  <a class="usa-button usa-button-secondary" href="{{ site.baseurl }}/join/apply/">Click here to start your application!</a>
</section>

If applicable, please *only* submit all veteran's documentation to Jacqueline Coleman at [jacqueline.coleman@gsa.gov](mailto:jacqueline.coleman@gsa.gov). In the subject line of your email put: Veteran’s Documentation for 1700256JCDE.

You can also apply for this position at the GS-14 level. [Read the GS-15 position description here.]({{site.baseurl}}/join/position-description/gs-15/)
