---
layout: post
date: '2014-08-21T12:10:00-04:00'
tumblr_url: http://18fblog.tumblr.com/post/95378798453/creating-an-open-fec

title: "Creating an open FEC"

description: "Campaign finance information is not very approachable, even when made available as open data. The laws that regulate how money can be spent around elections are important to our democracy, but sometimes it's difficult to understand how these laws apply. Between Senate, House, and Presidential campaigns, thousands of people run for office on a regular basis (every two years for the House of Representatives, every six years for the Senate, and every four years for the Presidency). With each election comes a huge collection of information on candidates and political committees, most notably the contributions and expenditures they receive and make. This information can, at times, be difficult to understand, especially without a full understanding of the context of the rules and regulations around how it is collected and monitored."
excerpt: "Campaign finance information is not very approachable, even when made available as open data. The laws that regulate how money can be spent around elections are important to our democracy, but sometimes it's difficult to understand how these laws apply. Between Senate, House, and Presidential campaigns, thousands of people run for office on a regular basis (every two years for the House of Representatives, every six years for the Senate, and every four years for the Presidency). With each election comes a huge collection of information on candidates and political committees, most notably the contributions and expenditures they receive and make. This information can, at times, be difficult to understand, especially without a full understanding of the context of the rules and regulations around how it is collected and monitored."

image: ""

authors:
- majma
- sean
- manger
- victor
- amos

tags:
- agency work
- fec.gov
- open data


---

Campaign finance information is not very approachable, even when made
available as open data. The laws that regulate how money can be spent
around elections are important to our democracy, but sometimes it’s
difficult to understand how these laws apply. Between Senate, House, and
Presidential campaigns, thousands of people run for office on a regular
basis (every two years for the House of Representatives, every six years
for the Senate, and every four years for the Presidency).

With each election comes a huge collection of information on candidates
and political committees, most notably the contributions and
expenditures they receive and make. This information can, at times, be
difficult to understand, especially without a full understanding of the
context of the rules and regulations around how it is collected and
monitored.

The good news is that this information is already made available for
public use by the Federal Election Commission (FEC). The FEC is a
regulatory agency that, among other things, releases campaign finance
information. The commission is bipartisan and has long shown a
commitment to making sure their actions fairly and equitably disclose
important data around certain election activities. This data powers
important work by a number of transparency groups, is used by
journalists to report on election trends, and informs the public about
how money is spent around federal elections.

A few weeks ago, FEC and 18F started to explore how all of this great
information can be better presented to the public. Over the past few
weeks, we’ve begun learning all we can about the FEC, the process by
which it collects and shares data, and how individuals outside of FEC
use that data on a regular basis to gain insights into the workings of
our democracy.

Users of the [FEC website](http://fec.gov) vary in profession and
expertise in campaign finance policy and laws, which leads us to
consider:

-   Different formats and presentations
-   Interactive web presentation or aggregated data as CSV reports
-   Raw filing data for independent analysis

Creating a solution that will be effective for different use cases is a
challenge — exactly the type of challenge that fits what 18F was created
for. We’re excited about the opportunity to work on a project of such
critical importance to the United States.

We’re still learning about the FEC’s current and future users and will
continue working with groups both inside and outside FEC to better
understand their needs. We are performing research to better understand
FEC’s current audience, as well as the audience they’re not currently
reaching. We will test the strengths and weaknesses of our ideas and
understanding of the FEC’s website users by developing small-scale
prototypes we think will address user needs then let people use and
critique these prototypes.

This work, and your input, will directly impact how we and the FEC
reimagine their digital presence. Please follow our
[repository](http://www.github.com/18f/FEC) and send us specific
[requests or ideas](https://github.com/18F/fec/issues) through our issue
tracker. You can also be bold and provide us a specific approach or
implementation idea through a [pull
request](https://github.com/18F/fec/pulls)! We can’t wait to work with
you to create a more elegant, user friendly, and accessible way to
interact with the FEC.
