---
title: "Hackathons: Not Just For Folks Who Code"
layout: post
authors:
- kate
tags:
- hackathons
- events
- how we work
- howto
excerpt: "A few members of the 18F team recently published an excellent guide on welcoming new coders to civic hackathons. In the same vein, we’d like to offer a list of strategies for including non-technical folks in your hackathons."
description: "A few members of the 18F team recently published an excellent guide on welcoming new coders to civic hackathons. In the same vein, we’d like to offer a list of strategies for including non-technical folks in your hackathons."
image: /assets/blog/how-to-github/image.jpg
---
A few weeks back, my colleague [Sarah Allen](https://twitter.com/ultrasaurus) asked me to volunteer at
[**GovTechHack**](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/04/02/govtechhack-hacking-for-civic-improvement/),
a hackathon in promotion of civic good. Stoked on lending a hand, I
agreed, but I harbored secret concerns about the extent to which I’d be
able to contribute. I’m not, after all, a developer.

Confession time: Prior to this event, I held the unfortunate prejudice
that less-than-techy folk like myself couldn’t make a substantial
contribution at a hackathon. Fortunately, I was wrong.

When organized conscientiously, **hackathons aren’t just for folks who
code** — and they’re more impactful as a result. Hack-event organizers
everywhere would do well to recognize that encouraging a diversity of
skills at their events benefits not just project or team leads, but
volunteers and their larger communities. When people with diverse
talents contribute to a unified cause, the outcome is more complex — and
more likely to succeed.

Getting Started
---------------

My first night at the two-day event, I demoed
[Midas](https://18f.gsa.gov/2014/07/16/midas-a-marketplace-for-innovation-in-government/)
and [Open Opportunities](https://midas.18f.us/) to interested
parties. (For context, Midas is a crowdsourcing platform that fosters
cross-team and cross-agency collaboration worldwide, and Open
Opportunities is a task-based network that allows federal employees to
collaborate across agencies.) Having written content for both projects,
I’m familiar with the platforms and can walk potential users through the
basic task flows. Earlier that day, Sarah had reassured me that people
wouldn’t ask me technical questions. “They’ll mostly want to see the
platforms and how they work,” she said.

Most people were interested in the projects in a high-level sense, but
some of them were curious about topics I couldn’t speak to — what sorts
of development needs the project had, for instance. Unable to answer
these questions with the precision I’d prefer, I referred the inquirers
to folks who could answer. Still, my confidence was rattled.

As we left the event, my colleague [Raphy
Villas](https://twitter.com/phirefly) asked how my night had gone. I
confided to him that, happy though I was to be volunteering, I was
afraid I wasn’t offering that much. “Now, if anyone had any content
needs,” I said, trailing off and looking meaningfully into the distance.

“Content needs?” Raphy confirmed. “We’ve got ‘em. Come to the
[**Communicart**](https://speakerdeck.com/18f/cap-communicart-18f-demo-day-9-may-2014)
table tomorrow and we’ll get you set up. We’d love it if you worked with
our team.”

Like that, I’d found a way I could participate in the way I do best — by
creating content.

Increasing Involvement
-----------------------

The next morning, coffee in hand, I wandered over to the Communicart
station. Raphy paired me up with Brad, a sales rep for a major CRM
company. Together, we did a quick critique of the current Communicart
front page, identifying elements that were working well and those that
could use improvement (or total redesign).

Keeping in mind our intended audience (people involved in the
acquisition and procurement processes) and desired tone (professional,
reassuring, and a hair more casual than formal), we set to work crafting
the copy for a new front page. Tough though it can be to wield the
metaphorical red pen, we kept *only* the text elements that would
contribute to the front page’s purpose: to communicate Communicart’s
unique benefits and inspire the visitor to try it out.

One of the most invigorating aspects of content design is to take an
idea — half-baked or fully formed — and, with that idea as inspiration,
rapidly generate an entire body of copy. Be that text a new front page
for a government procurement tool or the draft of a prose poem, the
thrill exists unfettered. As Brad and I put the finishing touches on our
call to action, we stepped back from the monitor and smiled. Working
together and channeling the positive, competitive energy of the group,
we’d made a meaningful contribution to Communicart — and, by extension,
the government.

Replicating the Good Vibes
--------------------------

Perhaps my favorite part of this anecdote is that Brad’s and my
experience is far from unique: Everywhere you go, you’ll find talented
salespeople, marketers, and content designers and strategists eager to
lend their skills to the cause of civic good. The primary hurdles
hackathon organizers face are recruiting these folks and making them
feel at home. Fortunately, these hurdles are easily cleared with the
right mindset and approach.

The benefits of such inclusivity are mighty. Yes, your featured projects
will benefit from fuller-spectrum development, speeding production. This
inclusivity also strengthens the symbolic bond between developers and
folks in other areas, stressing the interconnectedness of all elements
of a project, and growing stronger civic hacking communities. It follows
that a person who feels welcomed to and included in an event would be
far likelier to invite their talented friends to the next such event.

A few members of the [18F
team](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2F18f.gsa.gov%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHBRoB0dN_9W5ZL3iUuABvRxQjYxg)
recently published an excellent guide on [welcoming new coders to
civic
hackathons](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/04/03/how-to-welcome-new-coders-to-a-civic-hackathon/).
In the same vein, we’d like to offer a list of strategies for including
non-technical folks in your hackathons. We’d like to thank Leah Bannon,
a product lead at 18F, for generating this list of strategies.

The following are our tips on including non-coders to your next
hackathon.

Tips for Hackathon Organizers
-----------------------------

### Advertise to non-developers first

Before promoting your event through all the typical channels (and to
your typical audience of developers), first reach out to content
designers, visual designers, marketers, sales reps — anyone you’d like
to include who might not ordinarily be looking for hackathons to attend.

Advertising to non-developers first will ensure you have time to answer
questions before the event, put these folks in touch with previous
hackathon participants, and forward any training materials they might
find helpful.

### Send lots of actual emails to individual people

On the topic of event promotion, send lots of personalized emails to
people you know. Yes, it’s high-touch — and that’s why it works.

People who don’t consider themselves part of the hackathon community are
already at a bit of a disadvantage: They don’t identify as your target
audience, which means they have a greater cognitive burden to overcome
in order to feel comfortable participating in your event.

Help them overcome that burden. Email them directly and let them know
what to expect and why you’d like them to participate — what unique
skills they can share and what they may take away from the experience.

### Explain how the day will work

Familiarity encourages comfort. In many cases, newcomers’ fear of the
unknown might dissuade them from participating in your hackathon. Help
new participants scale this hurdle by letting them know how the
hackathon will play out.

An easy (and effective) way to do this is to distribute a schedule
before the event. Not only will this give participants a handle on
what’s to come, but it will also help them identify the sessions
(activities?) that appeal most to them, letting them make the best use
of their time.

### Include contact info for questions

On that note, make yourself available to answer questions. Include your
contact information in pre-event communications, and respond to
inquiries promptly.

###Draw parallels between the hackathon and your team

Leah Bannon highly recommends this strategy. “I like to talk about how
the goal of a hackathon or hack night is to build a website or digital
service — the same goal that many companies have,” Leah says. “In the
real world, the creation of these products takes the effort of whole
teams: developers, designers, comms people, UX testers, and so on, and
the same is true at hackathons.”

### State repeatedly that newbies are welcome

Want to know a great way to help newcomers feel welcome at your
hackathon? Tell them. Make it a point to approach and engage people who
look adrift or aren’t participating. Ask them about their background,
what brought them to the event, and what they’d love to accomplish
there. Kindness and communication go a long way in helping folks feel
like they’re integral to a team.

### Offer training concurrent to the hackathon

One way to entice unlikely participants to your hackathon is to offer
training sessions during the event. Providing channels for participants
to learn new skills — or develop existing ones — is a great way to
promote your event’s attendance.

Case in point: Brad spent part of Saturday afternoon learning the basics
of
[Git](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fgitref.org%2Findex.html&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHFIp1aeG5QbF6bT7sZK0-4q8t24A).
With those under his belt, he bootstrapped a new responsive front-page
design by the end of the afternoon.

### Follow up after the event to see what you could have done differently

Even the most conscientious hackathon organizers have room for
improvement. As soon as possible after your event, send a satisfaction
survey to participants. As concisely as you can, ask them what worked
well, what didn’t, whether they’d recommend your event to a friend, and
what changes they’d like to see in future events. More importantly,
*act* on this feedback — simply collecting it isn’t enough.

For more tips and tricks, check out
[these](https://18f.github.io/hackathontrainingday/)
[links](http://techladyhackathon.org/).

Have additional tips to add to the list? [We’d love to hear them.](http://techladyhackathon.org/)
