---
title: Five questions with Dan Brown

authors:
- kate

date: 2015-05-19

description: "Dan Brown, co-founder of D.C.-based design firm EightShapes and
author of Communicating Design and Designing Together, has spent years
studying how and why conflict arises in the workplace, its centrality to
good design, the differences between healthy and unhealthy conflict, and
more. Dan will be speaking at 18F on Friday, May 22 at 1:30 PM."

excerpt: "Dan Brown, co-founder of D.C.-based design firm EightShapes and
author of Communicating Design and Designing Together, has spent years
studying how and why conflict arises in the workplace, its centrality to
good design, the differences between healthy and unhealthy conflict, and
more. Dan will be speaking at 18F on Friday, May 22 at 1:30 PM."

tags:
- events
- speaker series
- dan brown
- design
- 18f
image: /assets/blog/speaker-series/d-brown.jpg
---

<div class="align-left"><img alt="Dan Brown" src="/assets/blog/speaker-series/d-brown.jpg"></div>

Dan Brown, co-founder of D.C.-based design firm
[EightShapes](http://eightshapes.com/) and author of “[Communicating
Design](http://www.amazon.com/Communicating-Design-Developing-Documentation-Planning/dp/0321712463)”
and “[Designing
Together](http://www.amazon.com/Designing-Together-collaboration-management-professionals/dp/0321918630/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1431552817&sr=1-1&keywords=Designing+Together+Dan+Brown),”
is fascinated by conflict — but not in the way you might think. Brown
has spent years studying how and why conflict arises in the workplace,
its centrality to good design, the differences between healthy and
unhealthy conflict, and more.

Dan will be speaking at 18F on Friday, May 22 at 1:30 PM (RSVP
[here](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/18f-design-presents-dan-r-brown-registration-16981311560).)
In preparation for his talk, we began an email exchange with him to get
his take on several conflict-related topics — read on for the full
conversation.

---

*This interview has been edited and condensed.*

**18F: We’re all looking forward to your presentation and are keen to
get your insights on conflict — how it arises and how it can be used to
encourage collaboration. To begin our Q&A, how did you become interested
studying and writing about conflict?**

**Dan Brown**: About 10 years ago, I wrote the first edition of my first
book, “Communicating Design.” After its publication, I gave lots of
talks and workshops. In those sessions, the majority of discussion
topics focused on the so-called people issues:

-   How to get people to read the documentation
-   How to get good feedback on the documentation
-   How to facilitate a conversation around the documentation

I always knew the documentation itself was incidental to the process,
but those discussions clarified the real challenge. As I noodled on this
for years, I realized that we face the same situations on every project.
Yes, every project is different, but very few challenging situations are
novel. For example, if I said to you “irrelevant comparison,” you’d know
exactly what I was talking about. You’d think of that time you were
working on a complex transactional site for a dental insurance company
and some stakeholder said, “We want this to be like Apple.com.”

So, I did what any red-blooded information architect would do: I made a
list of all the situations. I hit up my friends and colleagues and
collected situations from them. I also realized that I was at a point in
my career where I’d collected a set of techniques I use to defuse or
redirect these situations. I refer to them as **patterns**, simple
starting points for changing the conversation.

**18F: What have you identified as the biggest source of conflict among
design teams?**

**DB**: It’s funny: I don’t think of parts of design as being a “source”
of conflict. The process of design IS conflict. We have a negative
association with conflict — something to avoid or solve or ignore. But
conflict helps design: It is the means for coming to a shared
understanding. To be effective, design teams need to be aligned around
lots of things:

-   The core design problem
-   The conception of the target audience
-   The constraints of the project
-   The overall design direction
-   The criteria for making design decisions
-   The standard for quality
-   The rationale for design decisions

And so many more. If members of the team aren’t aligned around these —
if they don’t have a shared understanding — they can’t move forward.
They operate at cross-purposes. But it takes effort to get that
alignment.

The hard part to grasp is that “shared understanding” doesn’t
necessarily mean “agreement.” Design processes involve decisions and
teams can’t be effective if they’re trying to build consensus around
every decision. So, I may not agree with the art director’s choices
around the brand identity, but I can’t do my job effectively if I don’t
understand them.

**18F: Are you of the opinion that all conflicts can be resolved and
transmutated into positive experiences, or are there any types of
conflicts that are a lost cause — that participants simply have to walk
away from?**

**DB**: Great question. While I do emphasize that conflict is the engine
of design, I also know that not all conflict is created equal. We lump
the good conflict and bad conflict under the same general heading, so
I’ve distinguished them as healthy and unhealthy conflict. With healthy
conflict, the participants have a **goal**. They have a set of objective
**criteria** for judging outcomes. They have a **format** for engaging
in conflict. These may not be formally documented or acknowledged, but
when you’re in a design review, there are unwritten rules for how that
works. The conversation that proceeds from the design review, presuming
people follow those unwritten rules of engagement, is healthy conflict.
They can become passionate. They can nit pick every decision. But if
their motive is achieving great design, and that motive is implicit in
their behaviors, that conflict is the stuff design is made of.

Unhealthy conflict is conflict for conflict’s sake. It’s personal. It’s
counter-productive. It doesn’t contribute to the design process.

Sometimes healthy conflict masquerades as unhealthy conflict. I see this
when stakeholders don’t have the right language for critiquing a design,
or talking about specific design decisions. They lash out because they
don’t have the words. (Parents of toddlers may recognize this behavior.
I believe we retreat into immature behavior when we don’t have the
cognitive tools to participate in challenging activities.) It’s hard not
to take that stuff personally. Even if you know there’s no force behind
the words, they can still distract you from the task at hand. The
patterns I mentioned earlier are some of the tools I’ve used to deflate
those conversations, to transform unhealthy conflict into healthy
conflict.

**18F: During the last 10 years, what shifts have you noted in our
(collective) ability to collaborate, if any? And what might be the
causes of said shifts?**

**DB:** I wouldn’t presume to speak for the entire industry. Each person
has their own issues to overcome. That said, the nature of our work has
changed, and that change puts new pressure on our teams. Since my start
in the Web business 20 years ago, I’ve seen websites become far more
complex. That complexity requires more elaborate planning and more
roles. We need to coordinate many more activities and potentially many
more people.

We’re already stunted when it comes to collaboration: This isn’t a skill
taught in school. You might get thrown on a group project, but no one
explains how to get the group aligned, how to assign responsibilities,
how to check in, how to communicate status, and countless other
behaviors that make teams effective.

**18F: To wrap up, what one piece of advice would you offer a new
designer?**

**DB:** Buy my books.

Just kidding. Everyone who answers these questions says that, right? No?
Just me?

Designers need lots of skills — people skills, leadership skills,
technical skills — but where I see the biggest gap is self-awareness.
There’s a general reluctance to admit our own shortcomings. Yes, any
skill can be learned, but experience shows that we’re all wired
differently, and those differences give us different abilities. I can
code, but I don’t because there are people who are much, much better at
it than I will ever be.

This extends beyond technical skills, however. Over the years, I’ve come
to recognize what situations make me uncomfortable. Moreover, I’ve been
able to admit that to my peers. This isn’t weakness: It builds the
strength of the team. Understanding where you contribute best and where
you need help can drive the planning of a project. Projects stumble
because someone is unwilling to admit that they’ve hit their limit on
something. Teams falter because someone is incapable of seeing how
they’re causing obstacles.

By being self-aware, you can confidently ask for help. And, ultimately,
this is the real test of a team, the real essence of collaboration.

---

If you’re unable to attend Dan’s presentation in person, consider
joining us via Hangout. We’ll tweet a link to the livestream just before
the event — be sure to follow [@18F on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/18F/)
so you don’t miss it!
