---
layout: post

title: "Three 18F Products That Will Help Your Workplace"

image: /assets/blog/three-products/hub.png


description: "I’ve worked at 18F for exactly six days. During those six days, I
learned about a few products that I wish I’d known about while at my
previous job. These products would not only have saved me hours of work
(itself a bonus), but they also would have fostered long-term
collaboration."

excerpt: "I’ve worked at 18F for exactly six days. During those six days, I
learned about a few products that I wish I’d known about while at my
previous job. These products would not only have saved me hours of work
(itself a bonus), but they also would have fostered long-term
collaboration."

authors:
- melody


tags:
- midas
- how we work
- github
- snippets
- The Hub
---

<p class="authors">
  by {% author melody %} 
</p>

I’ve worked at 18F for exactly six days. During those six days, I
learned about a few products that I wish I’d known about while at my
previous job. These products would not only have saved me hours of work
(itself a bonus), but they also would have fostered long-term
collaboration. All three of these products are currently available on
the [18F Github
page](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2F18F%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGPXEeDNDfxjPeA7tPvyQUm7wzUog),
so you can easily fork them and adapt for your own workplace, if you’d
like — in fact, I recommend it.

##The Hub

The Hub is just what it sounds like — a centralized place where team members share project documentation and more general information about how 18F works.

![A screenshot of The Hub](/assets/blog/three-products/hub.png)

The Hub is really easy to navigate, and it’s equally easy to update
— anyone can add new information in seconds. Yesterday, for example, I
added a note detailing how to search for 18F on Twitter. Other people
have added information about how to get started if you’re a new
employee, or information on the  projects they’re working on. I’ve found
it much easier to get up to speed simply because the Hub exists.
([code](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2F18F%2Fhub&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFo9OetvzHmlPa1_EndMyXdx-hVjw),
[more
information](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2F18f.gsa.gov%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2Fhub%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFNd8F6bD1Fqb1pD-3YPi2sEpWwiQ).)

##Midas
Midas: One of my coworkers describes Midas as a “Kickstarter for people’s time.” And it is. Here’s how Midas works: You come up with a great idea that would help your workplace, but you and your coworkers don’t have the skills to execute it. Rather than bringing in a contractor, you can post your project idea to Midas, where other people within your organization can see it and then work on it, if they’d like.

Midas is open source, which means anyone can download it and try it out.
(You can also  contribute suggestions for future iterations
[here](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2F18F%2Fmidas%2Fissues%3Fq%3Dis%253Aopen%2Bis%253Aissue%2Blabel%253A%2522help%2Bwanted%2522&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFDId6-njg1xuqRsxzE3SSNmPy9GA).)
Within the government, Midas is currently being piloted by the
[Department of
State](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.state.gov%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGJHYDcO3EIM35XGWEztNbk_AliHA) [[GitHub](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FUSStateDept%2Fmidas-crowdwork&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGRO3WXCxZxxyQxsAIBq7PwlUt10Q)]
and the [Department of Health and Human
Services](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.hhs.gov%2Fidealab%2Fi-want-support%2Ffor-hhs-2%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNH7GHV56c9dDII8hBF5aapI6ivhJg) [[GitHub](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FHHSIDEAlab%2FHHSFairTrade-Configs&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHp1J6D7fKfwMaZ2aBvFixOodm-eQ)]. This
system has also worked phenomenally well for [Open
Opportunities](http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.digitalgov.gov%2Fjoin-digitalgov%2Fopen-opportunities-in-digitalgov%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFUIjd2HhL5FpLfFY8wzRQGLJjYPw),
which connects people from across and within government agencies to
collaborate on projects. So far, over 100 projects have been completed.

![A screenshot of Midas](/assets/blog/three-products/midas.png)

Midas can benefit all organizations, but it’s especially useful for
those with distributed teams and whose employees have diverse skill
sets.  Using Midas, you and your colleagues can work on projects
together, get to know each other better, and develop skills you don’t
use as often as you’d like.
 ([code](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2F18F%2Fmidas&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHY7NSm_ByrmY_OuNTmgTMUMJKk8w),
[more
information](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2F18f.gsa.gov%2F2014%2F07%2F16%2Fmidas-a-marketplace-for-innovation-in-government%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEkmEHG_nTB1toMgoULmknyN-P-4Q).)

##Snippets 

Snippets are a quick way to see what everyone on your team did last week and what they’re working on this week. As you might imagine, they’re really, really short.

How do Snippets work? Basically, everyone on your team writes a summary
of what they did last week and what they’re doing this week; a
designated person collects these Snippets in a CSV file and sends out a
weekly email digest. Snippets subscribers can learn, at a glance, what
all of their colleagues are up to.

 ![A snippet from Mike Bland, describing his workflow](/assets/blog/snippets/20141215-mbland.jpg)

If you don’t have the technical know-how to collect this data in a CSV,
you can have people fill out Snippets via email or on a blog — the point
isn’t the tool itself, but getting people to share snapshot summaries of
what they’re working on. Once again, this tool is invaluable to large
and remote teams. ([more
info](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2F18f.gsa.gov%2F2014%2F12%2F17%2Fsnippets%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEJI9-w-SddWeSJb4yqEDar9FTwEQ))

What I like about these products is that they make it easier for large
teams to communicate and collaborate across geographic divides. They
also make it easy for people to document what they’ve learned or what
they’re working on, which simplifies collaboration and knowledge
transfer.

Joining 18F from outside of government was a big leap for me, but these
three products helped me get my footing quickly. Want to learn more
about 18F, the products we’re working on, and opportunities to join the
team? Visit the
[dashboard](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2F18f.gsa.gov%2Fdashboard%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEFhWTRxSlgHLDJSR51Y5wt79mEaw) and
learn
[more](https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2F18f.gsa.gov%2F2015%2F01%2F21%2Fjoin-us%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFdgSTqkf6Mzk1JOKuTEo_Bdgrj8g).

-Melody Kramer
