---
title: "Aaron Gustafson on accessibility and flexibility"
date: 2015-08-11
layout: post
authors:
- kate
tags:
- design
- events
- speaker series
excerpt: "Aaron Gustafson talks about a few design-related topics, including maintaining awareness of our gadget obsession and recommendations for building a pattern library."
description: "Aaron Gustafson talks about a few design-related topics, including maintaining awareness of our gadget obsession and recommendations for building a pattern library."
image: /assets/blog/aaron-gustafson/headshot.png
---

Even if you’re not familiar with the name Aaron Gustafson, you’ve most likely encountered his work. Aaron is a web standards advocate at Microsoft and literally wrote the book on “Adaptive Web Design,” which Jeffrey Zeldman calls a “modern classic” and Jeremy Keith calls “the clearest, most beautiful explanation of progressive enhancement I’ve ever read.” (Progressive enhancement is the process of making a site’s content accessible to any user, regardless of their browser, device, network, or any other special need.) He was formerly a manager of the [Web Standards Project](http://webstandards.org/), and has also worked at Box, the New York Times, Walgreens, Yahoo, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, among other organizations. We’re thrilled that he’ll be visiting 18F this Wednesday to speak on responsive web design.

I recently had the chance to chat with Aaron (via email) about a few design-related topics, including maintaining awareness of our gadget obsession and recommendations for building a pattern library. Read on for more from our conversation.


\*\*\*

*Note: This interview has been edited and condensed.*

**Kate Garklavs**: What’s the number one obstacle folks encounter as
they adapt their interfaces for mobile, and what actionable tips can you
offer folks facing this challenge?

**Aaron Gustafson**: I think coming to terms with the fact that we can’t
control everything is a struggle for many designers. The web is quite
different from any other medium in that we have little to no control
over how our content reaches our audiences. A number of factors affect
the final product: the network, the browser, the device, screen size,
amount of RAM, processor speed, assistive technology in use, and so on.
When you begin to think of experience as a continuum rather than some
monolithic ideal, you start to see these as constraints that help you
focus on what matters rather than annoyances you have to work around.

**Kate**: [You’ve
mentioned](http://webstandardssherpa.com/ask-the-sherpas/apple-products-and-mobile-assumptions)
that we (people working in tech) must remain aware of our fondness for
the latest, greatest gadgets in order to design well for diverse
audiences. How can people stress the importance of this outlook — and
make sure it’s represented in workflows — in an organization that might
not share this view?

**Aaron**: This is a real challenge for many organizations. It’s helpful
to find real people (rather than avatars) to represent the different
constituencies you’re trying to reach. Real people with real challenges
are always more relatable and often foster more situational empathy.
Beyond that, it’s sometimes helpful to overwhelm certain people with
data regarding device proliferation and diversity. [The Next
Web’s
recent report on Android
fragmentation](http://thenextweb.com/insider/2015/08/05/this-is-what-android-fragmentation-looks-like-in-2015/)
is a great example of this.

**Kate:** What recommendations would you give to someone building a
pattern library for the first time?

**Aaron**: Start small. Look for simple, repeatable patterns and codify
those first. Then add to the library bit by bit. In an ideal world, I
like to have a large team working on the pattern library, with different
team members responsible for a handful of patterns. If each pattern is
"owned" by a small sub-team consisting of folks from different
disciplines — content strategy, design, development — the end result is
often better than if one person makes the patterns and other have to
implement them. Ownership is important because it gets people invested
in the library and ensures they’ll use it. And by having each small team
focus on a handful of patterns, they can be on the constant lookout for
ways to improve and iterate on them.

**Kate**: A more personal question: Do you apply principles of
progressive enhancement to non-work aspects of your life?

**Aaron**: I think the most obvious way I apply progressive enhancement
in my life is by trying to be as egalitarian as I can in the things I
do. I think equality of opportunity is important, but so is the
understanding that equality of outcome is not always possible or even
desirable. It’s important to be adaptable and roll with the punches as
it were. I’m a big fan of the saying, "We cannot control what happens in
this world, we can only control our reaction to it." Those are words I
try to live by.

**Kate**: What sites, people or resources do you turn to for
inspiration?

**Aaron**: I’m a big fan of Jeremy Keith’s work when it comes to
big-picture web stuff. I also find Bruce Lawson, Christian Heilmann, and
Tim Kadlec to be quite insightful. There’s really no beating Sara
Soueidan when it comes to learning about SVG. I also love the
presentations and writings of Stephen Hay, Zoe Mickley Gillenwater, and
Lyza Danger Gardner.

**Kate**: Finally, what one piece of advice would you offer new
designers?

**Aaron**: I can’t pick just one, so I’ll give you two: My first piece
of advice is to take the time to really understand the web as a medium.
It can take some time, but will make you a better designer. My second
piece of advice is to be flexible, not only in the way you design but in
how you think about your process and how you view the results of your
work. These two pieces of advice will serve you well in the long run.

\*\*\*

Thanks again to Aaron for answering our questions. Be sure to tune in to
the livestream of Aaron’s talk this coming Wednesday, 8/12 at 10:30 a.m.
ET. We’ll tweet the livestream link just before the event starts
— follow [*@18F*](https://twitter.com/18F) for event information and
more.
