---
title: "Preventing technical debt"
date: 2015-10-22
authors:
- chrisc
- sarah
tags:
- technical debt
- best practices
- modern practices
image: /assets/blog/technical-debt/iceberg-noaa.jpg
description: "In the final part of our series on technical debt, we talk about ways to minimize accumulating bad or unnecessary technical debt in the first place."
excerpt: "In the final part of our series on technical debt, we talk about ways to minimize accumulating bad or unnecessary technical debt in the first place."
---

Up until this point, we’ve talked mostly about [how to deal with
technical debt after the
fact](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/10/05/managing-technical-debt/). So what
can you do to minimize accumulating bad or unnecessary technical debt in
the first place?

**Embrace agile development methodologies.** It’s no secret that 18F
advocates agile development methodologies. That’s because agile offers a
framework of proven process and technical practices (for example,
frequent iterations, retrospectives, [continuous
integration](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration),
[refactoring](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_refactoring),
[automated testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_automation),
[collective code
ownership](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extreme_programming_practices#Collective_code_ownership),
[definition of
done](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/04/24/agile-developments-secret-weapon-transparency/),
work-in-progress limits) for creating high-quality software and avoiding
technical debt from the start.

**Give thoughtful consideration to the architecture.** Choose languages,
databases, and frameworks with careful consideration of the project
needs and the strengths and weaknesses of those decisions. Make each of
those choices from modern, open-source, and stable projects. Changing
these bigger decisions is expensive and hard.

**Use good software design practices.** The best laid architecture
choices are often insufficient to handle the unknowable future. For
example, it may be necessary to extract services from a monolith, or
switch databases for stability and consistency. The goal of good
software design is to reduce the cost of change, whether that change is
the addition of a feature or big architectural changes. Cross-language
concepts like [loose
coupling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loose_coupling),
[cohesion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cohesion_%28computer_science%29),
and [YAGNI](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/Yagni.html) ("You Aren't
Gonna Need It") help any project reduce debt. In addition, each
programming paradigm has best practices with
[SOLID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID_(object-oriented_design))
design principles being applicable [to both
functional](http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/165356/equivalent-of-solid-principles-for-functional-programming)
and object oriented languages.

**Understand user needs and conduct solution experiments.** Don’t get
married to a technical solution or approach too quickly, particularly
one that is complex and hard to reverse. Unfortunately, automated tools
can’t detect bad architecture decisions or technology choices. Take the
time to understand user needs and to explore a range of solutions
through experimentation or prototyping to arrive at an answer (referred
to as a [spike
solution](http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules/spike.html) in
agile).

**Be prudent about incurring technical debt.** Sometimes it’s prudent to
accept technical debt for short-term tactical reasons, but be sure it
doesn’t cause irreversible damage and you’re prepared to pay it down in
the future.

**Continuously inspect code quality.** There are a number of tools for
automatically analyzing the quality of your code and alerting you of
potential hotspots (for example, coding standards violations or code
duplications). Include these tools as part of your continuous
integration strategy. Additionally, adopt pair-working practices such as
[peer code review](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_peer_review)
and [pair
programming](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/05/04/pair-programming-why-two-heads-are-better-than-one/)
as daily rituals. Finding and fixing problems immediately is the best
insurance against the compounding effects of unpaid technical debt.

**Measure your technical debt.** Measure your product’s technical debt
to provide early warning signs of potential problems. Track metrics for
code quality, code coverage, velocity rates, defect rates, defect
resolution rates, and others. Automated tools are good for some of
these.

**Reducing technical debt should be part of your culture.** As Scott
Ambler
[notes](https://disciplinedagiledelivery.wordpress.com/2013/11/10/technical-debt/),
technical debt isn’t going to fix itself. Encourage and empower
developers to [refactor code
opportunistically](http://martinfowler.com/bliki/OpportunisticRefactoring.html),
always leaving the code better off than it was before — every day.
Create an environment in which developers and management collaborate
together on controlling technical debt. This requires open, honest, and
frequent lines of communication, as well as a shared understanding of
the benefits of keeping technical debt in check. Sometimes simple
refactorings won’t be enough to reverse debt. For example, rewriting a
backend component in a different programming language. This is a
strategic decision that requires a high level of trust and transparency
between developers and management.

This post concludes our four-part series on technical debt. Here’s a
quick recap of everything we covered across the series:

In the [first post](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/08/07/technical-debt-1/),
we explained the dangers of technical debt and why it’s important to
understand. In the [second
post](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/09/04/what-is-technical-debt/), we gave
you a description of what technical debt is and why it’s not all bad. In
the [third
post](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/10/05/managing-technical-debt/), we gave
you concrete steps for managing technical debt. And, in the last post
(this one), we provided you with advice on how to prevent or mitigate
technical debt accumulating in the first place.

Should you need any further advice on technical debt and how you can
overcome it on one of your projects, please reach out to us via email at [Inquiries18F@gsa.gov](mailto:Inquiries18F@gsa.gov).
