---
title: "Flexibility when releasing a new product: Peace Corps' new donations platform"
date: '2015-04-09'
layout: post
image: /assets/blog/peacecorps/image04.png
tags:
- peace corps
- how we work
authors:
- cm
description: "We were proud to provide design and development work for the Peace Corps' new donation platform. We want to share a few reflections around drawing that delivery line for this new product, and explain where we think we made the right call and look at other decisions which still keep us up at night."
excerpt: "We were proud to provide design and development work for the Peace Corps' new donation platform. We want to share a few reflections around drawing that delivery line for this new product, and explain where we think we made the right call and look at other decisions which still keep us up at night."
---
![Screenshot of workflow for new Peace Corps donation platform](/assets/blog/peacecorps/image04.png)

We were proud to provide design and development work for the Peace
Corps' new [donations platform](https://beta.peacecorps.gov/donate/)
which will allow the Peace Corps to further its mission by providing
funding for volunteer projects. Releasing this project within our tight
deadline required us to choose the direction of our efforts carefully;
in some cases we think we chose well, we learned lessons from others.

Deciding when to release a project is always a balancing act. We want to
build enough features to be useful, but to go live as quickly as
possible. Even with years of experience, drawing that “release” line is
challenging; we will always over optimize in some areas and
under-deliver in others. However, in many cases, a productive
application that generates real user feedback is well worth making that
call early.

We want to share a few reflections around drawing that delivery line for
this new product, and explain where we think we made the right
call and look at other decisions which still keep us up at night. By
highlighting some of the bigger (and more contentious) decision points,
we hope we can help inform your next project(s), as well as our own.

## Progressive enhancement

Our effort to refresh the Peace Corps' donations platform stemmed from
many goals, such as highlighting volunteer stories (to humanize the
agency), creating an experience optimized for mobile devices, and
simplifying the donation process. The last point proved particularly
challenging, as we had little control over the payment processor and
minimal flexibility in the collections form. Luckily, we *could* reduce
the number of steps between landing on the site and donating. When the
user found a compelling story, they could select a donation amount
in-line, turning what used to be a four-step process into a single
click.

![screenshot: workflow of donation pathways on Peace Corps site](/assets/blog/peacecorps/image03.png)

Our ideal interface would have been a seamless user experience, but once
scoped would have required a heavy lift from our front end and
accessibility teams. We would need to dynamically generate the interface
and provide a fallback for users without scripting support. With an eye
on the clock, we chose instead to create a simpler form using radio
selectors to allow users to select a donation amount. Though this felt
clunky and defeated our single-click goal, it worked, so that's where we
started. The budget eventually allowed for additional improvements to
this interface to be prioritized. Currently, the experience for most
users is roughly one step away from our initial design, but it *remains*
a step away. However, since we released without our optimal solution, we
bought time to build some other features (perhaps skipping payment
confirmation, perhaps additional sort options). Stepping back and
re-prioritizing allowed us to make the product better on the whole.

In another situation, starting with a simple solution ultimately led us
down a worse path. Our most complex user interaction offers multiple
filters and categorization mechanisms for selecting how a user's
donation will be used by the Peace Corps volunteers. A reasonable
technical architecture for this sort of page would involve asynchronous
requests, where data is transmitted in chunks instead of in one large
block, so that the browser only loads what is needed. We chose to start
with a simpler approach, however, by including all content in the
initial page load and simply hiding elements based on filters. With
either strategy, users selecting a specific country would only see
projects and funds relevant to that country, but the latter approach
requires much more markup. Not long before launching, we realized that
this approach led to massive page sizes when using live data. We quickly
hacked around this problem via compression on our caching layer, and we
later added additional patches to minimize redundant markup. We're still
not where we should be with regards to site load time because our
initial approach was too simplistic.

## Zero downtime and caching overkill

During our early planning phases, we were informed there might be a
couple concurrent announcements by the Peace Corps which could drive
significant traffic to our site. As a result, we spent many hours
designing and implementing infrastructure that could tolerate large
amounts of traffic. We designed an architecture for one component hosted
on Amazon Web Services S3 and CloudFront to handle the brunt of the
users. The main donations app is protected by a memcache-based layer to
keep server load low. It uses tiered caching so that certain data is
kicked out every five minutes while other pages are generated hourly.
With several machines primed and auto-scaling capability, we expected to
handle dozens of requests per second.

![screenshot of donation platform for Peace Corps birding for conservation project](/assets/blog/peacecorps/image00.png)

After reviewing the numbers from Peace Corps' media blitz in early
March, we know that part of our calculus was correct — S3 and CloudFront
*did* take the brunt of our user load — but our other estimates were
wildly off. The absolute number of hits was significantly below our
capacity.

While there has been good traffic to the site, we made the wrong call
when architecting. Our caching layers led to additional confusion from
Peace Corps admin staff, who needed to know that their content may not
be “live” for an hour. We didn't actually need this layer and certainly
not the multi-tiered approach we used out of the gate. Our auto-scaling
server cluster sits at minimal utilization; we will certainly save money
once we spin it down. While the peace of mind is certainly appreciated,
the beefy implementation was overkill. If we had instead started with a
simpler vision, we would have simpler configuration, leaving less room
for confusion and waste.

## Cutting features

Replacing legacy (existing, outdated) systems is always a challenge. Not
only do we need to find all of the technical boundaries, we are also
expected to match (and exceed) existing functionality. Two features of
the existing donations portal proved particularly problematic during our
design process. Our easy-donation strategy did not account for the dozen
or so pieces of donor information the existing system collected. The
legacy system also provided a search engine, allowing users to find
funds based on keywords. One of these features would make it to launch
but the other would not.

![Screenshot: product backlog for Peace Corps sprints](/assets/blog/peacecorps/image02.png)


We pushed hard to cut as many fields as possible from the donor form,
but knew this would be problematic given the number of stakeholders
needed for approval. We therefore began a parallel effort to test our
backend process with a replica of their existing form. Though it wasn't
our intent, we ended up using a tweaked version of this for launch
(after discovering that the process to change the form could delay
launch by many months). Here, starting with the simpler approach
(duplicating existing fields) meant we did not waste time as we learned
our limitations.

We reasoned that the other major missing feature — search — would need
either a full-blown search index or a tightly coupled database
implementation. This would add nontrivial design and development time
that was needed for other, higher-priority features. So we kept the
search feature in the backlog (a holding area for features not actively
planned). When it came time to release, the feature was still not
present. Time will tell whether this tradeoff was worthwhile.

## The road ahead

We will no doubt see more dividends and costs associated with our
technical choices in the coming months, but we have pulled out the above
as a starting point for analysis. Implementing the simplest solution
allowed us to add other features (and/or move our launch date up), but
some of the initial solutions weren't actually viable. On the other
hand, some optimization efforts were red herrings (e.g. caching) while
others now seem like a requirement (e.g. the static site). Ultimately,
we recommend you start simple but don't refuse to dive deep when there's
a good use case.
