---
title: "18F discussion: Should project teams code first or design first?"
layout: post
image: "/assets/blog/code-design/decisions-blue.png"
tags:
- 18f
- how we work
- design

authors:
- melody
excerpt: "Recently, three members of our team sat down for a conversation about when teams should start coding on a project."
description: "Recently, three members of our team sat down for a conversation about when teams should start coding on a project."
---

When starting a new project, should a team code first or discover first?
That was the question recently posed to the 18F team by Robert Read, one
of our developers.

![18F employees at the white board, deciding how to start.](/assets/blog/code-design/decisions-blue.png)

Rob asked the thought-provoking question hoping it would lead to an
internal conversation on different approaches to user-centered software
design. It did, and the result was positively delightful — with
designers and developers weighing in on everything from [approaches to
protosketching](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/01/06/protosketch/)
to usability testing to user-centered design.

I asked Rob and 18F designer Jesse Taggert if they wouldn't mind
elaborating on their initial conversation in a more formalized way. They
were happy to, and so the three of us sat down to debate whether teams
should code first, design first, or a combination of the two.

Here are highlights from that conversation:

**On why it is valuable to code as soon as you can**

**Robert Read:** My position is that coding is a medium, not unlike
paper and I would never want to exclude a particular medium from my
toolkit. As a coder, it always makes sense to be coding as a way to
explore ideas, in the same way that other people always have a pencil in
their hands and are doodling in order to explore ideas.

You should always begin by coding as soon as you start talking to a
customer about something. In saying that, I believe that modern coding
practices allow you to produce things that are testable extraordinarily
quickly. Sometimes, if you have someone who is good at coding, you can
produce a working prototype in just an hour as you're learning from the
person what it is that they want. I suggest that this should be a
standard practice for designers or any team that is servicing a customer
or an end user.

**On why it is sometimes best to wait — the solution isn't always found
in the code**

**Jesse Taggert:** If you start off absolutely with coding, it's not
necessarily a bad thing, but it's a huge presupposition that the answers
are about technology. What I'm often finding by doing design research is
that sometimes it's more about the process or service experiences. And
we want to understand that more before we start to say, 'We're gonna
make a new improved, technical experience to answer some of those
needs.'

**When creating a technical prototype is really beneficial to a team**

**JT:** We were recently talking about a project where the stakeholders
had envisioned that their solution was going to be a huge technical
problem. Rob did this prototyping session with one of his colleagues. At
the end, they had a working, responsive app and demonstrated to these
folks... that it wasn't going to be a big, overwhelming project. So
that's a win for coding — demonstrating the look and feel and value of
technology. But coding may not always be the solution to the actual
problem, which might involve more behavior and process.

**I asked both Jesse and Rob if the complexity of the project should
affect the decision to code first versus conduct design research first**

**JT:** I would push back against the word complexity versus using words
like known and unknown. If it's an unknown project, we want to do a lot
more discovery and research. And if it's a known thing, you might be
more comfortable bringing in the technical stuff.

**RR:** I agree with Jesse. It's not really a question of complexity. It
makes more sense to think along the dimension of how known or unknown is
the thing you're trying to address.

**I then asked Rob and Jesse if it could be confusing or risky to show
users a coded prototype so early in the process.**

**RR:** The danger is that when you show something like a coded website
to someone, they will seize on it too quickly as the final solution. I
think the real risk here is that people will fail to understand that
something that you code can be thrown away just as easily as it was
created. The code must be treated as no more significant than a sheet of
paper that someone made a sketch on.

**JT**: I've had prototypes where, [you want to] keep it crude, because
as soon as it looks too good people, whether they say it or not, they
get attached to it…. There's always that balance between how it looks
and feels, which can buy stakeholder or client buy-in, and how you
manage it moving forward so the clients understand it's not final. I
would add that in that scenario, emphasizing the results of task-based
usability testing is a good way to help clients assess whether the
product is working or not. A prototype may look great to a stakeholder
who is swayed by good looking design, but we can say, 'We did these
tests and they didn't work as intended, so don't like it too much.”

**On developers submerging their egos to serve the end user**

**RR:** I've had the pleasure working with [*Kent
Beck*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kent_Beck) in the past and one of
the things that he focuses on is the fact that developers have to really
submerge their egos and their personalities and have to recognize that
they are totally in service to the end user. In the case of having a
designer on the team, that basically means you're in service to the
designer who is interpreting the needs of the end user.

It's very important that the development team use its intelligence and
creativity to figure out how to give you things testable to the design
team as early in the process as possible. So it's not that you're
creating a finished product as early as possible, but the development
team should be thinking, 'Okay the design team wants to test this
hypothesis or test out this idea — how can we build a fourth of that
solution which we can give to them and they can valuably do usability
testing on?'

**On how thinking of serving the designer leads to more creative
thinking**

**RR:** If you think of it that way it does actually require more
creativity because the developers — instead of thinking of a perfect
product, must think of themselves as moving through a swamp or a
landscape to get there. And it's the path that's important, not the end
product. And the path is in service to the design team being able to
confirm with their suspicions or test things with the user.

**On design research needing space at the beginning of a project**

**JT:** One of the things about design research is that research often
needs space at the beginning of a project. I've worked on really high
functioning agile teams and I always called it 'the sanctity of the
backlog.' They worked so hard and they pulled from what's in the backlog
and their stories are well thought out and it's amazing. And if design
and research doesn't have enough lead time before that, then it's a very
panicked situation because you know you have a team that values what
those stories are, and you haven't had enough time to add material to
field material for a sprint or two. Often it's called Sprint 0.

**RR:** I understand that. Design should always lead development by at
least two sprints so that the developers know what they're working on.
But I guess, to be a little bit provocative, I would say why would a
designer not want to have the development team at his or her service at
the very beginning? Why would you ever say, 'I don't want someone
working for me.' As long as the development team is disciplined about
understanding that in the end, they are in service to the end user.

**JT:** During the research phase, you might not need a developer team,
but the research team may be composed of developers, designers, etc.

**On meeting the needs of the end users**

**RR:** I would just finish by saying no matter what you do, the most
important thing is to focus on the experience of the end user.
Everything else is just a detail about the process for achieving that.
But the most important thing, from a spiritual or psychological point of
view is to always be focusing on the end user.

**JT:** The meta-thing is absolutely yes. And in this government
environment, there's also the user experience of the people in
government learning this process, and it's a really fascinating space to
be in.

