---
title: Four questions with the CFPB design team
date: 2015-09-21 16:52
tags:
- events
- design
- speaker series
authors:
- kate
excerpt: "Designers Mollie Bates and Natalia Fitzgerald will be speaking tomorrow at 18F on their experience building the design team at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), as well as more generally on their approaches to user-centered design."
description: "Designers Mollie Bates and Natalia Fitzgerald will be speaking tomorrow at 18F on their experience building the design team at the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), as well as more generally on their approaches to user-centered design."
image: /assets/blog/speaker-series/cfpb-speakers.jpg
---

![Consumer Financial Protection Bureau designers Mollie Bates and Natalia Fitzgerald]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/blog/speaker-series/cfpb-speakers.jpg)

Designers Mollie Bates and Natalia Fitzgerald are intimately acquainted
with the ins and outs of consumer finance. Not only did the two
personally feel the effects of the 2008 market crash, but both helped
build the design team at the [Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau](http://www.consumerfinance.gov/) (CFPB),
an organization "devoted to empowering consumers to take more control over their economic lives" through leadership, education, and enforcement of regulations.

Bates and Fitzgerald will be speaking tomorrow at 18F on their
experience building the design team at the CFPB, as well as more
generally on their approaches to user-centered design. In anticipation
of this event, we sat down with them (in a metaphorical sense) to chat.
Below are the results of our email-based conversation.

*Note: This interview has been edited for clarity.*

**18F: Before starting with CFPB, what was your take on the average
American’s knowledge of consumer finance? What did you identify as the
biggest problem regarding transparency and communication of consumer
finance data, and how did your views change once you began working at
the CFPB?**

**Mollie Bates**: Before starting at CFPB, I think I had just a vague
understanding of the cascading problems in our economy created by people
not fully understanding the terms and risks of their mortgages. I don’t
think I had any awareness of the average American’s knowledge of
consumer finance; I was only familiar with my own struggles to read the
fine print on a credit card contract or calculate the impacts of
interest on my budget. Now that I work at the CFPB, I have a much
broader understanding of the variety and complexity of consumer
financial products that consumers often deal with, from mortgages and
student loans to prepaid cards and debt collection. The terms and risks
of these products are so complicated; as designers, we often play the
“average American” role on the team when we’re working with lawyers and
economists. If we don’t understand it and can’t simply explain it to
others, we know our audience won’t get it either.

**Natalia Fitzgerald**: I was living in Chicago in September 2008 when
the bottom dropped out of the market. Prior to the market collapse, I
didn’t consider the average American’s knowledge of consumer finance.
But, I imagine that my experiences mirrored those of other Americans. I
can still recall my feelings of financial uncertainty and vulnerability.
Despite all attempts at frugality and budgeting on my part, I couldn’t
get around the fact that I had mandatory monthly expenses to pay: rent,
car payment, student loans, utilities, food and credit cards. To add to
the feeling of instability, there were ongoing budget reductions at my
job, which meant that, on some days, I would clock in only to find that
certain co-workers were gone — laid off discreetly in order to balance
the budget. It was a tense time.

Shortly after the Bureau’s first birthday in July of 2012, I joined the
design team at the CFPB. At that time, the team was a hardworking and
dedicated unit of fewer than ten people. I didn’t know it yet, but I
would spend the next two years building a robust in-house graphic design
team within the agency.

Three years in, I still feel committed to our mission of transforming
the financial landscape by empowering consumers with well-designed,
user-centered tools and resources. Armed with impartial information,
data, and an avenue for filing complaints, the American people now have
a voice within the financial marketplace.

**18F: What’s the biggest government-specific design challenge you’ve
faced to date, and how did you address it?**

**MB**: I think that corporate America already understands the
bottom-line value of incorporating design into communication, marketing,
and products. Government is playing catch-up, and that’s the biggest
challenge I see. We are working hard to build relationships across the
Bureau so that everyone has a positive experience working with our team
and asks their colleague *“Has the design team looked at that?”* before
we release a report, chart, or something else to the public.

**NF**: As a government agency, we are required by law to comply with
Section 508, which dictates that federal agencies make their electronic
and information technology fully accessible to all audiences, including
people with disabilities. Accessibility for all Americans has always
been at the core of our mission as an organization, but this year we
have strived to move toward a stricter adherence to the Web Content
Accessibility Guideline (WCAG) 2.0. The guidelines are extensive and
there are many details to consider and work through. To add a level of
complexity, the guidelines were last updated in 2008, so a lot has
changed in terms of technology and the way web content is viewed. In the
absence of updated guidelines, we are charged with filling in the gaps
that exist and working to adhere not just to the specifications of the
law, but also to the spirit of the law. In working through this
challenge, we must carefully consider the diverse needs of our users.
We’re definitely becoming better designers as a result.

**18F: What strategies do you use to improve communication within your
own design team?**

**MB**: More than half of our design and development team members work
from their homes around the country, so we value asynchronous,
transparent communication. We use GitHub issue threads to iterate on
design projects and build our design standards. (You can snoop on, or
join, our discussions on our [Design Manual
repo](https://github.com/cfpb/design-manual/issues).) We also have
three cross-project design pods that meet weekly for an hour of peer
critique, and then we meet as a full team each Friday to show progress
on projects. Our critique technique has changed as our team has grown,
and we’re always striving to find a replacement for the irreplaceable
“hang it on a wall and discuss in person”-style of critique.

**NF**: We face a lot of communications obstacles stemming from the
separation of our large team into smaller self-sustaining project teams,
a substantial remote workforce, and a diversity of projects that are
progressing all at once. As designers, it is our responsibility to
ensure that the work we produce is consistent and clear. So, it’s
especially important that we avoid working in silos and that we keep up
with the work that other teams are producing.

Although we don’t all work side-by-side, we have developed a rich
culture of sharing and collaboration. This has taken many forms over the
years, from graphic design critiques, to brand development meetings, to
asynchronous feedback using GitHub. More recently, we set up a system of
cross-project critique sessions. In order to encourage
cross-pollination, we mixed up the groupings so that a single member
from each project team is represented. Breaking people out of their
project teams and maintaining a continuous conversation about the work
as it develops has improved our team culture and knocked down walls that
previously existed.

**18F: Finally, what piece of advice would you offer a new designer?**

**MB**: Start working full-time with a group of designers that can help
you grow and learn. You can only learn what you like and what your
strengths are by working, so don’t fret over getting the perfect job!

**NF**: My advice? Learn the fundamentals. When I was a new designer I
felt pressure to keep up with the latest trends in graphic design. I now
know that effective design is all about the fundamentals and there’s
nothing trendy about that. The fundamentals today — balance,
composition, spacing, typography and hierarchy — are the same as they
were one hundred years ago. In a world of rapidly changing technology,
the fundamentals remain constant. Learn them now and they will serve you
for your entire career.

\*\*\*

A big thanks to Mollie and Natalia for taking the time to share their
stories with us. To learn more about Mollie and Natalia’s experience
shaping the design team at CFPB and to hear more of their insights into
the design process, tune in to the livestream of their talk, which will
air on Sept. 22 at 3:30 p.m. ET. We’ll tweet the link just before the
event starts, so follow [@18F](https://twitter.com/18F) if you haven’t
already.
