---
title: "Lowering the risk of experimentation with open source code"
authors:
- andre
tags:
- micro-purchase platforms
- open source
- acquisition services
excerpt: "In September, Singapore launched the govBuy
Marketplace, adapted from the Technology Transformation Service’s (TTS) Micro-Purchase Marketplace. Both sites are an auction platform designed to connect government teams to small businesses ready to solve small technical problems using open source code. The code that powers both platforms is also open source."
image: /assets/blog/micro-purchase/singapore.png
hero: false
---
In September, Singapore launched the [govBuy
Marketplace](https://buy.gds-gov.tech/auctions), adapted from the
Technology Transformation Service’s (TTS) [Micro-Purchase
Marketplace](https://micropurchase.18f.gov/). Both sites are an auction
platform designed to connect government teams to small businesses ready
to solve small technical problems using open source code. The code that
powers both platforms is also open source.

Often when other governments [reuse or adapt one of our
projects](https://18f.gsa.gov/2016/01/06/tips-for-adapting-analytics-usa-gov/),
we set up a call with them to hear their story. We recently talked with
Singapore’s Government Digital Services team and learned a number of
interesting things, including their desire to run design auctions, that
they’ve faced similar barriers to convincing offices to use open source
code, and that Singapore’s micro-purchase threshold is almost exactly
the same as the U.S.

The most interesting tidbit was how 18F’s use of open source code to
build the Micro-Purchase Marketplace allowed Singapore to lower the risk
of experimentation. Because 18F works in the open, Singapore was able to
copy our code, remove pieces they didn’t need, tweak it to fit their
specific requirements, and quickly launch their own marketplace. (And
[talking about the project in the
open](https://18f.gsa.gov/tags/micro-purchase-platforms/) helped them
discover this even existed.) This greatly reduced the staff time
required to set up the marketplace and allowed the Singapore team to
focus on solving problems specific to them instead of resolving the same
issues the TTS team encountered.

It has also allowed them to push their counterparts towards using more
open source code in their work.

“We start small and take a bit of risk. Then we show success stories and
how it’s beneficial,” said Sheng Hau Chai, of the Singapore Government
Digital Service. “We do it for our own needs first and then convince
others later on with success stories.”

Running an experiment in government is often difficult because the
system is designed to avoid risk. But if we’re going to find a better
way to provide services to the public, we need to find ways to
experiment, take risks, and hone in on what works best.

Not every experiment is going to work, and not every solution is right
for every government agency. Open source code allows agencies to
investigate a solution before committing, quickly stand up their own
version to see if it’s a worthy investment, and receive support from the
community as they work.

If you want to get started, here are [34 projects you can
reuse](https://18f.gsa.gov/2016/04/06/take-our-code-18f-projects-you-can-reuse/)
(and [seven good
ones](https://18f.gsa.gov/2016/04/13/7-18f-projects-that-state-and-local-governments-can-reuse/)
for state and local governments), our [open source
policy](https://18f.gsa.gov/open-source-policy/), and our [guide to
making open source projects](https://pages.18f.gov/open-source-guide/)
friendly for contributors. Read the [Federal Source Code
Policy](https://sourcecode.cio.gov/) for more guidance and browse the
new [code.gov](https://code.gov) for open source inspiration from around the federal government.
