---
title: "Tips for capturing the best data from user interviews"
date: 2016-02-09
authors:
- ryan-sibley
tags:
- user research
- user-centered design
- usability testing
- tools you can use
- communication tools and practices

excerpt: "User interviews are, at a minimum, an opportunity for you to ask your
intended audience about their expectations, what their needs are and to
get direct feedback on the work you’ve done so far or on what you plan
to do. But an interview is only as good as the data you get out of it."
description: "In this blog post, we’ve detailed some of the
steps we take to help capture the best data possible when conducting
user interviews. This post is intended as a guide for people who need to
conduct user interviews and for people simply curious about how we work."
image: /assets/blog/user-interview/note-taking.jpg
---

![A group taking notes at a table](/assets/blog/user-interview/note-taking.jpg)

[User
research](http://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/user-research.html) is
part of every project we work on at 18F, and interviews are a core
component of that process. In this blog post, we’ve detailed some of the
steps we take to help capture the best data possible when conducting
interviews. This post is intended as a guide for people who need to
conduct user interviews and for people simply curious about how we work.

Interviews are, at a minimum, an opportunity for you to ask your
intended audience about their expectations, what their needs are, and to
get direct feedback on the work you’ve done so far or on what you plan
to do. But an interview is only as good as the data you get out of it.

While note-taking during user interviews might seem straightforward,
putting some thought into the process can help you gather the most
useful data. There are a number of things one can do to ensure the most
useful information makes its way back to your team for further analysis.
Below is list of ideas and practices for note-taking during interviews
to maximize the information that comes out of them.

1. Know what you want to capture
--------------------------------

The key to taking notes during user interviews is capturing the right
information. And capturing the right information, if you’re not
prepared, can be harder than you might think. It’s important to gather
the interviewee’s behaviors, attitudes, and experience with the set of
tools or problems you present in the interview. This is because the
information gathered in a user interview will be used later in the
process to answer questions and solve problems as the product is being
built and finalized. This means that you don’t have to act like a court
stenographer and transcribe everything said by everyone in the room.
Instead, **you should capture only the quotes and parts of the
discussion that are relevant to your research**.

Being comprehensive will take on a slightly different meaning in these
situations. However, that’s not to say you should ignore everything
else. If it’s your first time taking notes during an interview, you’ll
likely be eager to capture everything and miss nothing, which could lead
to you furiously taking notes but still missing context or the nuance in
what a subject is saying.

If you go into a interview knowing what information you’re looking for,
you’ll know what to capture in the written notes and spend less time on
bits of information that are less relevant. Having this confidence won’t
just make the notes more useful, but might also remove distracting
elements.

2. Get your questions ready
---------------------------

Have prompts ready before you go into the interview to understand what
you need to capture. It’s good practice to write your prompts down — it
will keep you from forgetting them and will keep you on track. You’ll
want the interviewees to feel comfortable while making the conversations
you have be as productive as possible, so having to pause often and say,
“*um, there was something else I wanted to ask but I’m forgetting*,” can
make things more awkward than having to glance at a notebook from time
to time.

3. Designate a note taker
-------------------------

If possible, have a dedicated note taker who is not also the dedicated
interviewer. Make it possible for other people on your team to hear or
observe the interview. Using Google Hangouts, appear.in, or a simple
conference service can help facilitate this and keep the number of
people physically in the room to a minimum. Allowing others to get a
feel for the mood and tone in the room during interviews can help put
notes into context later. Designating a note-taker can also be a good
way for someone to become acquainted with user research if they are new
to the field.

4. Use and prepare tools to make note-taking easier
---------------------------------------------------

Capturing notes in places like spreadsheets or other types of electronic
forms can help you stay organized and act as a cue for what areas you
still need to cover. Practically speaking, this means to capture
interview notes into the cells of spreadsheets where questions and
prompts are preloaded into the columns. If you’re spreadsheet averse,
simply using the interview guide you prepared as a note-taking template
can be helpful as well.

5. Capture verbatim notes and interpretations separately
--------------------------------------------------------

When capturing interviews, be clear about when what you’re writing down
is your interpretation versus what the subject actually said. For
instance, when you observe a person to be happy or uncomfortable with an
idea and you write that down, denote that interpretation by placing
brackets around the text. When you can, capture direct quotes and use
quotation marks to communicate that the text is from the subject
verbatim. Direct quotations are very useful. In addition to them adding
reliability to the information gathered, they also help people
understand the context and mood in which things were said.

6. Make analysis easier by annotating along the way
---------------------------------------------------

Star or otherwise highlight quotes or observations you think are
valuable so that you can easily find them later. Midway through a
project, you can often start tagging observations with themes as you
write.

7. Don’t forget body language!
------------------------------

Noting non-verbal signals can be very helpful when interpreting quotes
or paraphrases. When the interview participant says, “Well, that was
fun!” the quote means something very different depending on whether the
words are accompanied by a smile or a sigh. Smiling, nodding, pausing,
tensing up, or gesturing quickly are all examples of non-verbal signals
that help us interpret what an interviewee really means. Feel free to
note the body language you’re witnessing along with what’s actually
being said, and if you’re unsure about how a person reacted to the
interview questions, talk with teammates who observed the interview
along with you.

8. Consider privacy from the beginning
--------------------------------------

If your notes are going to be visible to your entire organization, take
a moment to think about whether there is personally identifiable
information (PII) in them that’s not absolutely necessary. Be sure to
strip out any PII as soon as the research phase is completed. This is
especially true if you’re researching a subject that is sensitive or
potentially stigmatizing. One common practice is to separate PII from
notes by putting all the contact information in a separate spreadsheet
and labelling notes with pseudonyms or code numbers. Make sure to scrub
the body of the notes for any specific references which could
de-anonymize them, such as place of employment if they work at a small
company. Clearly specify in your notes, at time of writing, any
information that participants want to keep confidential. It’s easy to
forget to do this later, and you don’t want to make mistakes.

9. Be cool
----------

If you get behind, don’t get flustered. Even seasoned user researchers
will have trouble keeping up with all the information coming in. While
it’s hard to solve this particular problem for everyone, doing your best
to be prepared will help you efficiently capture everything you’ve set
out to collect.

10. Do your best to not cause distractions
------------------------------------------

Try to keep a low profile and try not to distract the interviewee or
interviewer. Especially try to keep laptops and typing as inconspicuous
as possible. If you’re in a position where you’re both interviewing and
note-taking, try to make sure the laptop doesn’t form a barrier between
you and the interview subject.

11. Be sure to debrief
----------------------

Work with the interviewer to identify key takeaways immediately after
the interview. While the interview is still fresh in your mind, talk
about the things that you found pertinent or interesting, and record
these as such. Also record follow-up questions or document and material
requests that the subject offered, and note whether these are
forthcoming or you’ve already received them.
