---
title: " Content debt: What it is, where to find it, and how to prevent it in the first place"
date: 2016-05-19
authors:
- melody		
tags:
- communication tools and practices
- content design
excerpt: "Like technical debt, a failure to plan for
content-related debt can cause major headaches down the road. In this
post, I list some potential sources of content-related debt, list ways
to identify it, and then share strategies for preventing it in the first
place."
description: "Like technical debt, a failure to plan for
content-related debt can cause major headaches down the road. In this
post, I list some potential sources of content-related debt, list ways
to identify it, and then share strategies for preventing it in the first
place."
image: /assets/blog/content/scrap-paper.jpg
---

Technical debt is a term that refers to the “hidden” costs associated
with a system’s architecture and codebase. These hidden costs can make
software costly to change or update and may eat up resources that could
be better spent elsewhere.

We’ve written about technical debt a lot. Last year, my colleagues Chris
and Sarah dove into a [five-part
series](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/08/07/technical-debt-1/) on how to
manage and prevent technical debt; another coworker, Kane, wrote a very
popular piece on why developers should [choose design over
architecture](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/11/17/choose-design-over-architecture/) to
avoid technical debt.

Content creators and editors can face similar challenges related to
accumulated debt. And like technical debt, a failure to plan for
content-related debt can cause major headaches down the road. In this
post, I list some potential sources of content-related debt, list ways
to identify it, and then share strategies for preventing it in the first
place.

[![A 1940s photos of students standing over a pile of scrap paper]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/blog/content/scrap-paper.jpg)](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Victory_Program._After_bringing_their_scrap_paper_to_school,_8c34784v.jpg)
*Students in Washington D.C. taking part in a 1942 program to collect scrap paper.*

Sources of content and documentation debt
-----------------------------------------

Imagine, for instance, that you’ve been tasked with creating a handbook
for your staff that outlines common team practices. Or perhaps you’re
creating content that tells the public how to file a particular form.
All of the following are forms of content debt that could cause you to
have trouble with this task:

**No documentation:** Some tasks might be completed by staff without any
kind of written documentation. Others might over-rely on the
institutional memory of individuals.

**No structure to document:** Documentation might be completed, but
spread out across properties in numerous formats so no one knows where
to look. It might also be in various states of completion.

**Siloed content development:** Specific teams and projects may have
developed content, but that content might not be available or findable
to others.

**Parallel/redundant development:** Teams may have created similar
content and the results may need to be merged or aligned in order to
work well. They may even be conflicting statements.

**Identifying the best author:** Maybe someone wrote tasks down, but
that person isn’t the most knowledgeable on staff about that topic. How
do you connect each topic with the best individuals in your organization
to write about it? What if the best person is already overworked?

**Lack of ownership:** Someone writes stuff down, but no one on the team
takes ownership over the material — so it languishes.

**Everything is written down — literally everything:** Every little task
is written down, creating an overwhelming experience for the reader who
cannot determine what is meaningful. In addition, the entire mass of
content must be managed, adding to the debt.

**It’s not clear what should be written or documented, and where:**
Let’s say you have multiple places where content is placed. A new
teammate might not know where to add new material.

**Content outgrows the container:** If content is quickly being created
but the container it’s in doesn’t have a good information architecture
that allows that content to be surfaced, then it might be difficult to
find.

**Team members leave before content or documentation can be completed:**
Rotating team members on and off a team could result in documentation
not being fully developed, or too much churn for content to be
completed.

**Leaving content as the last step in a product process:** If you think
of content as something that can be added after other stages of the
project are complete, then you may be creating content that’s just not
necessary.

**Nothing in place to ensure content is routinely updated:** Is it easy
for a teammate to update content? Are there product or editorial
barriers in place for doing so? Are links broken?

**No way to alert readers when content was last updated:** Does the
reader or user know when the content was last updated and that it’s
accurate?

**Forgetting the audience and creating unnecessary content:** Creating
content but not thinking about a need or the audience for the piece of
content.

**A product changes, the content doesn’t:** When a process or product
changes, updating documentation isn’t built into the process.

**Lack of standards:** Information is not presented in a standard
fashion, making it difficult for the reader to comprehend. Or it might
be confusing, meaning that people disagree about what’s actually
documented.

**Deliberate obstructionism:** Teams or individuals want to maintain
artificial importance and therefore do not detail everything needed to
complete a task.

**Firefighting:** Putting out software fires with no time to update
documentation. In other words, content is far down on the priorities
list.

**Beyond existing job descriptions:** No one in the organization thinks
documenting processes is in their job description. Or content
responsibility is pushed far down the organizational chart where there
may be higher turnover.

**Making content nominally available:** Scanning a PDF and putting it online does **not** mean it's accessible. (h/t **Lauren Lockwood**, Chief Digital Officer, City of Boston)

**Using the wrong container for content:** Sometimes content is better as a data set than a paragraph. Knowing which one to use is key. (h/t **Lauren Lockwood**)

Consequences of content and documentation debt
----------------------------------------------

Buildup of content debt may not be as apparent as technical debt,
because it’s unlikely to initially cause software to break. Still, it
could easily result in confusion, the erosion of trust between the user
and the product, a greater need for customer support, slower progress,
the need for more meetings, more external and internal complaints, and
wasted time getting people onboarded to teams, projects, or
organizations. Thinking about content as an afterthought or postponing
documentation may result in poor or no documentation if priorities shift
or change.

Identifying content and documentation debt
------------------------------------------

There are a number of indicators or warning signs that can help your
team identify content debt.

**Slower rate of onboarding new users:** In software, velocity is a
measurement of how much work a development team can complete during a
particular interval (for example, two weeks). If velocity starts to slow
down over the course of several iterations, it maybe a sign that too
much technical debt has piled up and is now impairing development
productivity. Likewise, you can measure velocity by how quickly new
members to a team can onboard to a task or project. If new team members
start to get bogged down with documentation, can’t understand or find
documentation, or have trouble updating documentation, then content is
likely impairing productivity.

**Measuring the velocity of questions:** Measure the number of questions
you’re receiving on topics that you’ve documented. If the same question
is asked several times, perhaps that’s a sign that the content isn’t
meeting user needs (or they’re not reading it.)

**Performing a content or platforms audit:** A platforms audit is
equally as important as a content audit, particularly if you have
multiple platforms where users are finding documentation or content.
Auditing processes that lead to developing content through user research
will help you determine how processes (and content) may need to change.
Some questions to ask: How many platforms are we storing content on?
Does every platform have a content strategy? Are we providing the same
functionality on multiple platforms? Moreover: Is content difficult to
find or maintain? How consistent is the content? Is it easily editable,
if need be? How are we keeping track of changes or items that need to be
changed? When was the last time this content was maintained?

**Interviewing users**: This is perhaps the most important. Ask people
using your content to show you how they would find existing content or
contribute new content. Ask them who approves changes and who can author
posts. Their answers may indicate the direction that your content
efforts should take.

Deciding what to do with content and documentation debt
-------------------------------------------------------

After you determine what kinds of content or documentation debt your
team might have, the next step is to implement fixes into future product
cycles. You can either include extra time with each cycle, prioritize
content in the product backlog, or dedicate an entire cycle to content
fixes. We have also found it helpful to bring in new eyes on content and
documentation work: the people who have developed workarounds are not
going to be as helpful as the people who haven’t.

Preventing content and documentation debt
-----------------------------------------

How do you minimize accumulating content debt in the first place? Here
are a few ideas we found have worked for us when thinking about internal
documentation and tools:

**Give thoughtful consideration to architecture:** Choose tags,
platforms, and information architectures carefully. Changing bigger
decisions is expensive and hard, and being deliberate about architecture
at the beginning of a content project will save headaches later on.

**Give thoughtful consideration to archiving:** We use version control
software so that the public can see previous versions of our material.
Determining how to notify people that content is or is not up-to-date is
something that should be thought about at the beginning of a project.
Will this material ever be out-of-date? If so, what will happen to it?
To the link? To any links that might mention this material? Who is
responsible for editing or updating the material and what happens to
previous versions?

**Think about content early and often:** Too often, documentation and
content needs are brought in late into a project cycle, or content is
forced to adhere to an already-existing design. This isn’t good for
content creators or users. Bring the content designer onto a project
early, work documentation into project cycles, and don’t let debt
accumulate because it’s non-technical work. Think about review cycles
for the different types of content you might create: contact information
may need to be updated than Congressionally-mandated reports or a
historical overview of your organization.

**Measure content debt:** This is where data and metrics come in. Track
metrics for page traffic, 404s or errors, and reports of broken links.
There are ways to automate some of these tasks.

**Ensure experiences are synchronized:** If you’re developing content
for different platforms or different users, it’s important to ensure new
content does not conflict with existing content. A thoughtful content
audit can help with this.

**Reducing content debt should be part of your culture:** Content isn’t
going to fix itself. Encourage and empower people who recognize flaws,
and create communications pathways for surfacing, fixing, and editing
content. A high level of trust and transparency between teams helps with
this. Technical solutions can help with this. For example, what if
someone deletes a page that shouldn’t have been deleted? A good
technical solution ensures a) you have a backup and b) you can restore
it easily.

## Want more?

We’re always thinking about ways to improve content and minimize our
debt. If you have suggestions, please reach out to us via Twitter
[@18F](https://twitter.com/18F/) or by email at
[18F@gsa.gov](mailto:18F@gsa.gov).

*Thank you to Michael Hessling at the Environmental Protection Agency
and Larry Gillick, the Deputy Director of Digital Strategy at the U.S.
Department of the Interior for their suggestions for this post.*
