---
title: "Delivering the next generation of digital government"
date: 2016-05-03
authors:
- deniseroth
tags:
- general services administration
- technology transformation services
excerpt: "Today we take another step forward helping government develop the technology that the public and taxpayers deserve. I'm pleased to announce the creation of GSA's third service, the Technology Transformation Service."
image:
---

*Originally published on [GSA's blog](http://gsablogs.gsa.gov/gsablog/2016/05/03/delivering-the-next-generation-of-digital-government/).*

We are in an era of digital transformation across many different
industries, including government. Those organizations that have
successfully led in this area or have fully transformed into digital
organizations are succeeding at a faster pace than those who have not.
The imperative for the federal government to provide effective digital
service is clear. The public expects a responsive, transparent and
efficient government that mirrors their experience with private sector
entities.

GSA has historically played a central role in transforming government
technology, whether it’s assisting agencies in accessing and purchasing
from technology companies, informing and building out agency technology
services, or building new government-wide platforms and products at
scale.

Today we take another step forward helping government develop the
technology that the public and taxpayers deserve. I'm pleased to
announce the creation of GSA's third service, the Technology
Transformation Service. Much as the [Public Buildings
Service](http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/104444) and [Federal
Acquisition Service](http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/105080) meet our
partner agencies’ needs for real estate and acquisition, the Technology
Transformation Service will help agencies navigate how to build, buy,
and share user-centered and emerging technology solutions. This new
service will provide both the foundation for our government’s digital
transformation and also partner with other agencies to assist them in
their own attempts to transform.

The Technology Transformation Service is the “launchpad” to set us up
for the next big expedition for the federal government in technology. We
have to create a smart government that provides seamless experiences
designed for the user first. Creating the Technology Transformation
Service builds a great foundation for the federal government’s
modernization efforts.

The new service is comprised of the programs and services now offered by
the Office of Citizen Services and Innovative Technologies (OCSIT), the
Presidential Innovation Fellows (PIF), and 18F. Since their founding,
these programs have been providing innovative digital services and
leadership to our federal partners. They have developed specific
technology solutions in support of our customer agencies’ missions,
while also helping them rethink the way they use technology to serve the
American public. More and more, agencies are looking for this kind of
assistance.

By moving these programs into a new service, we are demonstrating a
commitment to make agile, user-centered delivery of technology the way
we do business moving forward. This new service complements GSA’s
current technology efforts, bolstering the strong support we already
provide to partner agencies and allowing us to deliver transformative
technology solutions.

Creating the Technology Transformation Service will allow GSA to better
deliver on our mission to provide the best value in real estate,
acquisitions *and technology* to government and the American people*.*
The new service will be led by a Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner.
Phaedra Chrousos, former Associate Administrator of OCSIT/18F, will
serve as the service’s first Commissioner, and Aaron Snow, Executive
Director of 18F, will serve as Deputy Commissioner.

Today is the first day of a new era in our agency. Just as we were the
first agency to put the internet on every desk 20 years ago, and the
first to move to the cloud five years ago, we continue to blaze a trail
providing cutting-edge technology support to our partner agencies.

Additional Resources:

-   [Press Release: GSA Stands Up New Service To Solidify Agile, User Centered Approach for the Delivery of Technology](http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/129918)
