---
title: "We asked over 100 of our coworkers: Why did you join 18F?"
date: 2016-03-16
authors:
- melody
tags:
excerpt: ""
description: ""
---
At the end of last year, we asked everyone at 18F to [*reflect on a
meaningful
project*](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/12/23/looking-back-2015-our-own-words/)
they worked on in 2015. We received dozens of responses, ranging from
[*working on internal
tools*](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/12/23/looking-back-2015-our-own-words/#guides,-resources,-and-tools)
to almost [*doubling our
workforce*](https://18f.gsa.gov/2015/12/23/looking-back-2015-our-own-words/#growing-our-team).

To celebrate our second anniversary, we once again reached out to people
across 18F. This time, we were curious about:

-   What led them to 18F

-   What their pathway into the federal government looked like

-   What they’ve loved working on so far

We got more than 100 responses, including people from every team and
time zone, and we’re excited to share their responses over the next few
days. Today’s post answers the question: **Why did you join 18F?**

Want to see your name on this list? You can see open positions and how
to apply [*on our join
page*](https://pages.18f.gov/joining-18f/index.html).

Why did you join 18F?
---------------------

### **Design**
*18F Design provide content, visual, and interactive design to the rest
of the organization.*

{{ shawn | team_photo }}

“I wanted a new challenge, and I wanted to learn from some of the best
minds in design and technology.” - [***Shawn
Allen***](https://18f.gsa.gov/team/shawn/)

{{ maya | team_photo }}

“18F started up during my Code for America fellowship, so I had a chance
to observe what 18F was doing while I was completing my fellowship. It
was a natural progression from using technology to solve local issues to
national issues. I knew that the variety of projects, impact, and people
working here was unparalleled. I could tell the people who worked at 18F
were extremely talented, had a depth of experience, and hearts the size
of Jupiter (as Todd Park likes to say). Designing for the public good
was the only thing that felt worthwhile to me.” - [***Maya
Benari***](https://18f.gsa.gov/team/maya/)
