---
title: "To get things done, you need great tools"
authors:
- vdavez
tags:
- security
- acquisitions
- cloud.gov
excerpt: "To folks new to government, one of the most surprising differences between our work and work in the private sector are the barriers in accessing commercially available software, and commercially available Software as a Service (SaaS) in particular. There are many good reasons for these barriers but digital teams need great tools to get work done and compliance requires tradeoffs associated with time to initial delivery and accommodation of constraints that are different from the private sector."
---
To folks new to government, one of the most surprising differences
between our work and work in the private sector are the barriers in
accessing commercially available software, and commercially available
Software as a Service (SaaS) in particular. There are many good reasons
for these barriers: the government places premiums on considerations
such as security, privacy, accessibility, license management, and
competition. But, digital teams need great tools to get work done, and
compliance requires tradeoffs associated with time to initial delivery
and accommodation of constraints that are different from the private
sector.

Since the creation of the Technology Transformation Service (TTS) in
May, we have made enormous investments in the overall security posture
of 18F, including bolstering the partnership between TTS and the CIO’s
office (GSA IT). Almost exactly six months ago, we announced that we
were [“full steam ahead” on our FedRAMP assessment process for
](https://18f.gsa.gov/2016/07/18/cloud-gov-full-steam-ahead-fedramp-assessment-process/)[cloud.gov](https://18f.gsa.gov/2016/07/18/cloud-gov-full-steam-ahead-fedramp-assessment-process/),
a Platform-as-a-Service for government teams. As part of that process,
we invested significant effort into [automating both our compliance
documentation](https://18f.gsa.gov/2016/04/15/compliance-masonry-buildling-a-risk-management-platform/)
and [our
infrastructure](https://cloud.gov/docs/ops/configuration-management/)
to ensure continuous improvements. The cloud.gov team is *awaiting final
signatures* from the CIOs of GSA, Department of Defense, and the
Department of Homeland Security to certify that the platform meets the
controls necessary to operate in the federal government.

To make system delivery easier, and to pave the way for development
teams in other agencies, we have also made significant investments in
the past year to dramatically improve our ability to make use of
commercially available SaaS products. Part of this process has been
completely changing our day to day relationship with GSA IT. We can only
deliver on projects like cloud.gov by working in lock-step with the CIO,
CTO, CISO, and security and compliance folks helping us chart this new
territory. For example, in September, GSA IT issued a [new policy
related to GSA’s IT Standards
Profile](https://www.gsa.gov/portal/directive/d0/content/529885), which
established a new “pilot process” that enables TTS to test out
commercially available cloud-based SaaS and ensure compliance with
various federal laws and policies. Our close collaboration with GSA IT
means that TTS can have the tools and resources it needs, and GSA
overall is more aligned with industry best practices.

Similarly, TTS is focused on helping to bring commercially available
products and services used widely in the private sector into the federal
government. For example, the TTS Acquisitions Office has been working in
partnership with the GSA Federal Acquisition Service to purchase SaaS
products that TTS relies upon. We are also working closely with GSA’s
Schedule 70 program to help [make it
easier](https://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/122754) to bring innovative
companies to work with the federal government.

Finally, the FedRAMP program is working this fiscal year on its
“[FedRAMP
Tailored](https://gsablogs.gsa.gov/gsablog/files/2016/11/FedRAMP-Look-Ahead-FY2017_11032016_V5.pdf)”
initiative, which will help accelerate the availability of low-impact
SaaS offerings government-wide, making it possible for agencies to more
readily adopt commercially available SaaS.

In the long-run, TTS wants to make it easy for the government to take
advantage of best-of-breed software, and to accelerate adoption of SaaS
by government agencies. Although there is much to do, we plan to
continue to improve our own processes within TTS to ensure that our
systems are secure, and to partner with other parts of GSA and industry
to help reduce the barriers for effective software delivery in the
government.
