## Intro:
In 2021, 18F formed a team to partner with the Department of Veterans Affairs’ Office of the Chief Technology Officer (i.e. VA OCTO)  with the goal of improving benefits claims processing times, so that veterans spend less time waiting for an outcome. This process frequently takes at least three months. The goal of our work at the VA was to reduce this wait time for assistance that many veterans critically need. Would it be possible to reduce it from months to days?

## Preview of main themes
This project achieved the original goal, producing a pilot system to automate some of the time-consuming and tedious tasks required of VA’s claims processors. The introduction of the pilot system led to a measurable improvement in processing times (TODO: find some data to include).  The system has continued to improve since its original launch, with increasing scope and capabilities. The engagement was a prime example of how 18F can be leveraged at agencies with ambitious objectives. We'll dive into what the team delivered, how they approached the work, and some reflections on why this project is a success.

## Timeline
### Map timeline to our key points
April 2021: Kickoff and Onboarding (narrow focus, prove hypothesis)
18F joined an existing team working on the problem space. It was determined early that the 18F team would be most helpful focusing on implementing a pilot system to test the hypothesis: that automating data retrieval as a part of processing benefits claims would lead to decreased times between claims submissions and claims decisions and outcomes. With this focus in mind, and with an existing proposed system architecture, the team began to do user research and design while also implementing the automation system and pursuing an Authority to Operate (ATO).

May/June/July: Research and Development, Risk Assessments (identifying show-stopping risks)
There was a period of time where everyone on the team focused on understanding the problem space and the needs of the various stakeholders. Users and benefits claimants were taken into consideration early and often. Sessions were held with VA claims processors so we could observe their standard operating procedures with the current systems available to them. We saw that their work involved plenty of manual data verification, which stood out as a key opportunity for automation. These sessions were crucial for gaining a holistic understanding of the process and systems involved with their work. The team had the background to understand why the proposed system featured the ability to generate a summary document based on key points of data related to a claimant. This summary would aid claims processors seeking to verify a veteran's eligibility. Success Factors: User research and user-centered design was embraced and continued throughout the time the pilot was implemented. The stakeholders and product owner understood why the team didn’t just hear the basic ask without seeking further context, and supported us while we worked to understand the domain.

Research into the various systems the VA uses to maintain, process, and log data led to the decision to use the VA's Lighthouse APIs to retrieve the needed data to generate the summary. Development began on the system's infrastructure and Lighthouse integration. The team was experienced enough with past ATO processes to anticipate the long turnaround time, so the process to pursue the ATO was started early, with the goal of having an ATO by the end of the year.

Along with research and pilot development, the team checked in to identify and analyze risks that could lead to failure to meet the goal to deliver a pilot to test the hypothesis within a reasonable amount of time (end of the year or earlier). As we looked at these risks and possible blockers, we identified some key show-stopping risks. We also realized that these risks were largely out of the team’s control, such as when we’d have an ATO and when we’d be able to integrate with downstream systems. A lot of the risks were a result of the vastness and complexity of the VA’s IT systems and teams. As the team realized this, it led us to rethink the approach of the proposed system. We asked ourselves, “What is the essence of what we want to deliver?” Our ultimate goal was to deliver a document to VA claims processors with summarized data that may help them assess a claim - this was the test of the original hypothesis. We then asked ourselves, “What can we do to narrow the scope of the work so that we’re more likely to deliver?”

August/September: Pivot

So we looked for ways to avoid show-stopping blockers. Was there a system that already has an ATO that we could integrate with and inherit that ATO as a result? In fact, we knew there was such a system - the veterans-api, which houses the server side of VA.gov. The veterans-api also was already integrated with downstream and upstream services that we knew our pilot depended on. We met with the core team who owned the veterans-api, who encouraged our idea to incorporate our pilot to the existing project and asked them their opinions on how feasible/difficult it would be to add our pilot as a “plug-in” to the veterans-api. That team reassured us that it was doable and welcome. With that reassurance, we brought a proposal to the pilot’s stakeholders. The proposal was: Since the ultimate goal is to prove a hypothesis, we should scrap the original pilot system planproposal in favor of a pared-down, narrowly-scoped integration with the veterans-api. This essentially eliminated the show-stopping risks we had identified. After explaining our reasoning behind the proposal, the pilot’s stakeholders agreed this was a reasonable pivot. So, despite the work already done towards building the pilot standalone system, we didn’t fall for the sunken cost fallacy. We began again, with a narrower scope.

October/November: Implementation of new scope
With much less bureaucratic traversal hanging over the project, the team felt more focused with a clearer path to delivery. We could focus on implementing core functionality with much less infrastructural overhead. We were finally on track to deliver the pilot by the end of the year, when we could test whether we’d save veterans’ time and effort with this approach.


December: Launch
The launch went smoothly, and we processed our first real claim with the pilot in place! (TODO: get concrete data about this)

January/February: Handoff
After the excitement of the launch and proving the hypothesis, it was time to think about longer-term goals for the project. (TODO: try to add data around how many claims have been successfully processed with shorter wait times because of this project) The team worked with the product owner to help onboard a vendor team to take over the project. There was enough overlap to leave the new team with valuable context, and one of our team members was able to stay on for an extended amount of time to further allow for a fluid transition. During this time, our team also helped advise the future direction of the project, including evaluating the technological landscape and identifying a promising path towards establishing a more permanent home for the project as it grows.
