---
title: Join 18F
permalink: /join/
layout: primary
lead: Help transform how the federal government does technology.
hero: false
redirect_from:
  - /apply/
subnav_items:
  - text: How to apply
    permalink: /join/#how-to-apply
  - text: Compensation and benefits
    permalink: /join/#compensation-and-benefits
  - text: More information
    permalink: /join/#more-information
---

We’re looking for candidates passionate about our mission, with top-notch software development, design, content, and operations skills to match.

We’re a remote-first team with offices in DC, New York, Chicago, and San Francisco, and we have teammates working all over the country. [Read more about how we make our distributed model work]({{ site.baseurl }}/2015/10/15/best-practices-for-distributed-teams/).

If you have any questions, please contact our Talent Team at [jointts@gsa.gov](mailto:jointts@gsa.gov).

## Open positions
Links below will take you to the Technology Transformation Services join page to apply.

**We currently have no open positions at 18F.**

<!-- Links below will take you to the Technology Transformation Services join page to apply. -->

<!--
TEMPLATE:
<section class="usa-grid-full">
  <a class="usa-button usa-button-secondary" href="LINK">JOB TITLE</a>
</section>
-->

## How to apply

To apply to positions at 18F and elsewhere in the Technology
Transformation Services, you’ll need:

-   A [government-style resume](https://join.tts.gsa.gov/hiring-process/#government-style-resumes)
-   A completed application
-   Additional documents if you are claiming veterans preference

You can find links to these document and more information in individual
job postings.

Most 18F positions are in the Excepted Service and are “not to exceed”
(NTE) positions, which means **they are two-year terms and can be
renewed once, for a total of four years**. To apply for these Excepted
Service positions, you must be a United States citizen or national
(residents of American Samoa and Swains Islands) and you must not be a
current GSA employee or contractor.

See all open positions and full instructions on the [Technology
Transformation Services join page](https://join.tts.gsa.gov/).

## TTS is an equal opportunity employer

We’re building a team that reflects the United States. We don’t
discriminate based on race, color, religion, sex, gender identity or
expression, national origin, political affiliation, sexual orientation,
marital status, disability, genetic information, age, membership in an
employee organization, retaliation, parental status, military service,
or other non-merit factors.

## Compensation and benefits


### Government pay grades

18F team members are hired for specific position descriptions at a
specific grade level from the federal general schedule (GS) (excluding
SES positions). The GS system is a pay system for civilian employees in
the federal government; evaluation and compensation varies by grade
level. The qualification requirements for each position at a specific GS
level are based on education, background, accomplishments, and
experience. The specific requirements will always be listed in the job
posting. Salaries of federal employees are public information, and your
salary may become publicly available on sites like
[FederalPay.org](https://www.federalpay.org/employees).

### Understanding grade levels

Federal employees on the general schedule range from GS-1 to GS-15. Find
out more about the GS system from the [Office of Personnel
Management](https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/pay-systems/general-schedule/).

GS grade levels specify a fixed compensation range for a particular
position, in particular geographic localities, within the federal
government. Understanding the relationship between GS grade level,
location, and compensation is important to understanding how salaries
work at 18F.

Each GS grade level contains a series of 10 steps. New employees are
usually hired at Step 1 of a GS grade. However, in special
circumstances, agencies may authorize a higher step rate for a
newly-appointed federal employee based on a [special need of the agency
or superior qualifications of the prospective
employee](https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/pay-administration/fact-sheets/superior-qualifications-and-special-needs-pay-setting-authority/).

The annual salary cap for all GS employees is \$164,200 per year. You
cannot be offered more than this under any circumstance. Use this [OPM
General Schedule (GS) Salary
Calculator](https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/salaries-wages/2017/general-schedule-gs-salary-calculator/)
to help you understand how GS level, step, and locality affect
compensation.

### Raises and bonuses

A step increase is the most common kind of raise for GS employees, and
the amount of time between step increases is dependent on the step. As a
GS employee, you have to wait one year to increase to a step 2, 3, or 4.
Similarly, you must wait two years before increasing to step 5, 6, or 7.
Lastly, you must wait three years before increasing to step 8, 9, or 10.
This means that if you join TTS at step 1, you’ll proceed to step 2 the
following year. If you join TTS at step 6, it will take two years to
progress to step 7.

Bonuses generally come after the year-end review process in late
September and are awarded based on your performance review results. You
must be a TTS employee for at least three months to get a performance
review. Bonuses are either a small percentage of your annual salary or
additional paid time off.

### Benefits and leave

The benefits package for federal employees includes medical, vision, and
dental insurance, FSA accounts, life insurance, paid leave, and the
Thrift Savings Plan (the government version of a 401K) with up to five
percent matching. Our telework policy affords increased flexibility, and
employees who use public transit to commute may claim commuter benefits.

18F also supports employees’ ongoing professional development by
providing training opportunities and encouraging employees to
participate in conferences, consortia, and other industry events.

## More information

For more information on how to apply, head over to the [Technology
Transformation Services Join website](https://join.tts.gsa.gov/). You’ll find more information on
open positions, the interview process, backgrounds checks, and our
hiring process. In addition, you can read the [TTS
Handbook](https://handbook.18f.gov/) for more information about working
at 18F, including:

-   [Benefits](https://handbook.18f.gov/benefits/)
-   [Leave](https://handbook.18f.gov/benefits/#leave)
-   [Telework and virtual worker policy](https://handbook.18f.gov/telework/)
-   [Professional development and training processes](https://handbook.18f.gov/attending-conferences/)
